Dedication

To my children,
Megan, Amanda, Christian, and Joshua,
who have taught me to lead and shown me
why being a Multiplier matters.

Contents

ONE
TWO
THREE
FOUR
FIVE
SIX
SEVEN
EIGHT
NINE
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D
APPENDIX E
THE

Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Foreword by Stephen R. Covey
Preface
The Multiplier Effect
The Talent Magnet
The Liberator
The Challenger
The Debate Maker
The Investor
The Accidental Diminisher
Dealing with Diminishers
Becoming a Multiplier
Acknowledgments
The Research Process
Frequently Asked Questions
The Multipliers
Multipliers Discussion Guide
Multiplier Experiments

MULTIPLIERS
ASSESSMENT

Are You an Accidental Diminisher?
Notes
Index
About the Author
Praise for Multipliers
Copyright
About the Publisher

Foreword
by Stephen R. Covey

I had the opportunity to work with a Multiplier when I was in my early twenties.
It profoundly shaped the rest of my life. I had decided to take a break in my
education to provide extended volunteer service. The invitation came to go to
England. Just four and a half months after my arrival, the president of the
organization came to me and said, “I have a new assignment for you. I want you
to travel around the country and train local leaders.” I was shocked. Who was I
to train leaders in their fifties and sixties? Some of these individuals had been
leading twice as long as I had been alive. Sensing my doubt, he simply looked
me in the eye and said, “I have great confidence in you. You can do this. I will
give you the materials to help you prepare to teach these leaders.” It is hard to
overstate the impact this leader had on me. By the time I returned home, I had
begun to detect the work I wanted to devote my life to.
His particular ability—to get more out of people than they knew they had to
give—fascinated me. I have reflected on this many times, wondering, What did
he do to get so much from me? The answer to this question is contained in these
pages.
Liz Wiseman has written a book that explores this idea more deeply than
anything I have read elsewhere on this subject. And her timing couldn’t be
better.

New Demands, Insufficient Resources
At a time when many organizations do not have the luxury of adding or
transferring resources to tackle major challenges, they must find the capabilities

within their current ranks. The ability to extract and multiply the intelligence that
already exists in the organization is red-hot relevant. Across industries and
organizations of all kinds, leaders now find themselves in what David Allen has
summarized as “new demands, insufficient resources.”
For some forty years I have worked with organizations that were grappling
with “new demands, insufficient resources.” I have become convinced that the
biggest leadership challenge of our times is not insufficient resources per se, but
rather our inability to access the most valuable resources at our disposal.
When I ask in my seminars, “How many of you would agree that the vast
majority of the workforce possesses far more capability, creativity, talent,
initiative, and resourcefulness than their present jobs allow or even require them
to use?” the affirmative response is about 99 percent.
Then I ask a second question: “Who here feels the pressure to produce more
from less?” Again, a sea of hands goes up.
When you put those two questions together, you can see the challenge. As
stated in this book, indeed, people are often “overworked and underutilized.”
Some corporations have made hiring the most intelligent individuals a core
strategy on the basis that smarter people can solve problems more quickly than
the competition. But that only works if the organizations can access that
intelligence. Organizations that figure out how to better access this vastly
underutilized resource won’t just be more enjoyable places to work; they will
outperform their competitors, which, in this global environment, might well
make the difference between companies that make it and those that don’t. And,
as with so many business challenges, leadership is clearly a critical force for
leveraging the full capability of the organization.

The New Idea
Multipliers: How the Best Leaders Make Everyone Smarter represents nothing
less than the leadership paradigm necessary for accessing the intelligence and
potential of people in organizations everywhere. It unearths and explains why
some leaders create genius all around them while other leaders drain intelligence
and capability from an organization.
Peter Drucker spoke of what is at stake when he wrote:
The most important, and indeed the truly unique, contribution of
management in the 20th century was the fifty-fold increase in the
productivity of the manual worker in manufacturing.
The most important contribution management needs to make in the 21st
century is similarly to increase the productivity of knowledge work and the
knowledge worker.
The most valuable assets of the 20th-century company were its
production equipment. The most valuable asset of a 21st-century institution,
whether business or non-business, will be its knowledge workers and their
productivity.1
This book explains with great clarity the kinds of leaders who will answer the
promise outlined by Drucker and those who will not.
As I read this book, a key insight was that Multipliers are hard-edged
managers. There is nothing soft about these leaders. They expect great things
from their people and drive them to achieve extraordinary results. Another
insight that resonated with me was that people actually get smarter and more
capable around Multipliers. That is, people don’t just feel smarter; they actually
become smarter. They can solve harder problems, adapt more quickly, and take
more intelligent action.
People who understand these ideas will be well positioned to make the shift
the authors describe from genius (where they may try to be the smartest person
in the room) to genius maker (where they use their intelligence to access and
multiply the genius in others). The power of such a shift is difficult to overstate.
It is a night-and-day difference.

What I Love About This Book

What I Love About This Book
I admire the work and insights in this book for several reasons.
First, the journalistic integrity and sheer tenacity required to analyze over 150
executives across the Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa, and for giving us a
book full of rich and vivid examples gathered from all over the world.
Second, it focuses the discussion on just those few things that really
differentiate intelligence Multipliers and intelligence Diminishers. This isn’t a
general book on leadership, with all good qualities on one side and all bad
qualities on the other. It is more precise than that, identifying and illustrating
only the five most differentiated disciplines.
Third, its “range of motion.” This book names a phenomenon the way
Malcolm Gladwell seems to be able to, but also goes down several layers, to
provide practical insight into exactly how to lead like a Multiplier.
Fourth, the way it seamlessly combines cutting-edge insights with timeless
principles. Many books do one or the other. Few do both. This book will relate
to your life today and it will connect to your conscience, too.

An Idea Whose Time Has Come
Multipliers is relevant for the entire world. Corporate executives will
immediately see its relevance, but so will leaders in education, hospitals,
foundations, nonprofit organizations, entrepreneurial start-ups, healthcare
systems, middle-size businesses, and government at the local, state, and national
level. I believe this book is relevant to everyone from first-time managers to
world leaders.
And it comes to the world at a time when it is greatly needed, a time of “new
demands, insufficient resources,” when CFOs and HR directors are surprisingly
in synch about the need for an approach that better leverages current resources.
The principles in this book will always be true, but in this economic climate they
will win in the marketplace of ideas. Their relevance will give them life and
attention that is deserved. These are ideas that matter now, and, as Victor Hugo
once said, “There is nothing more powerful than an idea whose time has come.”
I have a vision of thousands of leaders discovering they have unintentionally
diminished the people around them, and taking steps toward becoming a
Multiplier. I have a vision of schools with diminishing cultures being reinvented

around Multiplier principles, to the benefit of the whole community. I have a
vision of world leaders learning how to better access the intelligence and
capability of those they serve, to address some of the world’s toughest
challenges.
And so I challenge you to recognize the opportunity that is in your hands.
Don’t just read this book; pay the price to really become a Multiplier. Don’t let
this become a mere buzzword in your organization. Use the principles to
reinvent your organization toward a true Multiplying culture that gets more out
of people than they knew they had to give. Choose to be a Multiplier to people
around you, as that president was to me in England all those years ago. I have
great confidence in the good that can come from such an approach to leadership
in your team and in your entire organization. Just imagine what would happen to
our world if every leader on the planet took one step from Diminisher to
Multiplier.
It can be done.

Preface

This book began with a simple observation: There is more intelligence inside our
organizations than we are using. It led to the idea that there was a type of leader,
those I came to call Multipliers, who saw, used, and grew the intelligence of
others, while other leaders, whom I labeled Diminishers, shut down the smarts of
those around them.
When the book was released in 2010, this idea struck a chord with managers
around the world, perhaps because it came on the heels of a global recession, at a
time when a tectonic shift was occurring in management and the ground was
moving under all our feet. What was once predictable and manageable had
become volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous. With the explosion of
information, for example, doubling every nine months in science and
technology,1 there is simply too much for any one person to know.
Consequently, the role of leader has shifted, too—moving away from a model
where the manager knows, directs, and tells and toward one where the leader
sees, provokes, asks, and unleashes the capabilities of others.
Ideas that were once considered subversive are the new normal. Diminisher
bosses still exist, but, like old BlackBerry phones, it is only a matter of time
before they become obsolete and people upgrade to newer models. As
companies do the math, they realize that they simply can’t afford leaders who
waste talent, suppress vital innovation, and slow business growth. After all, why
would a company pick results-driven leaders who diminish people when they
could have leaders who both deliver results and grow people around them?
Increasingly, we are seeing diminishing leaders being asked to adapt . . . or
leave.

Consider the fate of Jorgen, a general manager for a large, multinational
pharmaceutical company.2 Jorgen was a classic Diminisher who ran a country
operation like a dictator and made life miserable for his direct reports. For years
his behavior was tolerated because he delivered results, but then the company
underwent a significant restructuring to better respond to changes in the
marketplace. Instead of a single person calling the shots from the top, they
organized around dynamic teams that could span organizational boundaries.
Jorgen, accustomed to being the boss, struggled to adapt to this nonautocratic
approach. Several months later, Jorgen was called to the corporate office in
Europe and told that his style of leadership wasn’t working. Jorgen responded
with a compelling presentation that detailed his unit’s performance. The
executive team stopped him and said, “This is purely a style issue. You can no
longer be a leader here.” Jorgen was removed from his role as general manager
and moved into a lower level staff role. His former direct reports celebrated
when they heard the news, especially one who was just days away from quitting.
But Jorgen wasn’t pushed out by staff mutiny; he was a casualty of
circumstance. The business environment pushed his company out of the
Diminisher camp, and he was left behind. We are seeing more and more senior
leaders left stunned in similar scenarios.
While some organizations seek innovation and agility, others are struggling to
do more with less. Matthew Haas, assistant superintendent of the Albemarle
County public school district in Virginia, said, “We are just running so lean. I
can’t imagine a world where you could work in silos and not collaborate. You
used to be able to isolate yourself, but now efficiency requires collaboration.
When you think about what is best for the organization and remove your ego,
being a Multiplier is the only way to go.”
While the direction may be clear, we clearly aren’t there yet. Gallup’s State of
the Global Workplace study finds that across 142 countries, only 13 percent of
people around the world are fully engaged at work.3 SHRM reports that while 86
percent of Americans were happy with their jobs in 2009, that percentage has
been in slow but steady decline ever since.4
This lack of engagement isn’t just an emotional issue; it implies a waste in the
fundamental resource that powers most companies today—intellectual capital. In
2011, after assessing hundreds of executives, we found that managers were

utilizing just 66 percent of their people’s capability on average. In other words,
by our analysis, the managers are paying a dollar for their resources but
extracting only 66 cents in capability—a 34 percent waste. When considering
only their direct reports, that number increases to 72 percent. As we’ve tracked
this indicator over the last five years, we’ve seen a slow, steady improvement,
rising from 72 percent in 2011 to 76 percent in 2016.5 And while managers have
become better at estimating their diminishing impact on others, most managers
are still overestimating their Multiplier characteristics. They believe they are
having an enabling, liberating effect on their team, but team members see things
differently. We are improving; however, too many organizations are still
overmanaged and underled.
In realizing a richer way of working, many critical questions still remain: How
fast can we get there? What is the best path to impact? Who can make the shift
and who can’t? What do we do with those who can’t? How do we move and
reshape an entire culture? As many authors will confess, the most important
insights on a subject tend to come long after the book is written. This new
edition incorporates what my colleagues and I have learned as we grappled with
these questions and continue to teach and study pioneering companies and their
leaders.
Here are the three most essential insights that have shaped this new edition:
In studying leadership, one learns a lot about
followership. I’ve learned that people across cultures, across professions, across
industries come to work each day hoping to be well utilized—not by being given
more and more work, but through the recognition that they are capable of
contributing in significant ways and doing progressively more challenging work.
The need for Multiplier leadership spans industries and cultural boundaries; it’s
not just for innovation centers like Silicon Valley. It is as relevant in industries
such as manufacturing, education, and healthcare and in cities like Shanghai,
Seoul, and São Paulo. In cultures with high levels of hierarchy, we still find the
presence of Multiplier leaders, but we find that the effects of Diminisher leaders
are more pronounced—the 2× difference between Multipliers and Diminishers
becomes a 3× differential (with the average Diminisher yielding roughly 30
percent of their employees’ capability instead of the global average of 48
1. THE NEED IS UNIVERSAL.

percent).
And, it’s not just for Millennials. Certainly new and younger workers expect,
if not demand, to be treated differently than those who came before them. But
I’m not convinced Millennials actually need or want anything different than
other corporate denizens. Contributors of all ages and stages want their ideas to
matter, their voices to be heard, and workplaces where they can grow.
Millennials have just been too impatient to wait and too empowered by
technology not to speak out. What’s good for the Millennials is good for the
mainstream.
2. SOMETIMES THE GOOD GUYS ARE THE BAD GUYS. When I began this research,

most Diminishers appeared to be tyrannical, narcissistic bullies. But I’ve come
to see that the vast majority of the diminishing happening inside our workplaces
is done with the best of intentions, by what I call the Accidental Diminisher—
good people trying to be good managers. I’ve become less interested in knowing
who is a Diminisher and much more interested in understanding what provokes
the Diminisher tendencies that lurk inside each of us. Chapter 7, “The Accidental
Diminisher,” is new and offers a glimpse into how our best intentions can go
awry and how, with self-awareness and simple workarounds, otherwise good
managers can become great leaders. I’ve added this chapter because our greatest
gains in the workplace will not come by reforming hardened Diminishers but by
helping Accidental Diminishers become more intentional Multipliers and
increasing the number of Multiplier moments in the workplace (perhaps raising
their utilization of employee talent from the current average of 76 percent to the
target 100 percent).
To build
organizations where intelligence is richly utilized, we need both an offensive and
a defensive plan. Most leaders who read the book aspire to lead like Multipliers
and find “the better angels of their nature,” as Abraham Lincoln once said.
However, their efforts are stymied because too much of their mental energy is
spent dealing with the devils around them. For others, their diminishing
colleagues leave them so enervated that their will to lead excellently is weakened
as well. To understand how to counter the effects of shortsighted, absentminded
Diminishers, I surveyed hundreds of professionals and interviewed dozens more.
3.

THE

BIGGEST

BARRIERS

ARE

CONTEXTUAL

AND

CULTURAL.

I learned that the reductive effect of a Diminisher is not inevitable. While you
cannot change another person, you can change your response and smooth the
sharp edges of your diminishing boss or colleague. Chapter 8, “Dealing with
Diminishers,” offers strategies and tactics that help reverse the cycle of
diminishing, or at least minimize its effects.
Unlocking individual potential is not just a matter of personal will and
individual behavior change; it is a function of entire systems, and reshaping
collective will is hard work. To help you navigate the complexities of large-scale
change, my team at The Wiseman Group and I have studied organizations that
are successfully making this shift. Chapter 9, “Becoming a Multiplier,”
illuminates the paths that help entire organizations overcome inertia and move
from insight to impact.
This new edition also contains some additional resources. There are new
Multiplier examples from all around the world and appendix E is a set of
experiments to help you develop Multiplier mindsets and practices. Also, the
Frequently Asked Questions in appendix B have been expanded and now
address the hardest-hitting questions that I’ve been asked by thousands of
readers. These questions include: What about leading in times of crisis? Does
gender play a role? What about the iconic leaders like Steve Jobs with strong
diminishing streaks? . . . and more.
Our world is rapidly changing. To keep up and to create the type of
workplaces where people thrive, we need diminishing leaders to be replaced by
those who serve as true Multipliers, inspiring collective intelligence and
capability on a mass scale. It’s immense, both in promise and deed, so let’s
begin.
—Liz Wiseman
Menlo Park, California, 2017

ONE

The Multiplier Effect

It has been said that after meeting with the great British Prime Minister
William Ewart Gladstone, you left feeling he was the smartest person
in the world, but after meeting with his rival Benjamin Disraeli, you
left thinking you were the smartest person.1

—BONO
During the summer of 1994, Derek Jones joined the US Navy to escape his
decaying hometown of Detroit, Michigan. Derek, a street-smart, confident
eighteen-year-old, scored high on the navy’s aptitude exam and was slotted to
enter its advanced electronics computer program. Following nine weeks of boot
camp in Illinois and eight months of intense training on missile firing systems,
Derek earned advancement to petty officer third class and was selected for
advanced training as an AEGIS computer network technician. He graduated first
in his class and, in recognition, was able to choose the ship he would serve on;
he picked the navy’s newest Arleigh Burke–class guided missile destroyer.
Within months, he had established himself among the 210 enlisted men as a
superior performer and was recognized by his officers as one of the ship’s
smartest and hardest-working sailors. On the verge of earning a critical
qualification, Derek felt on top of his game—that is, until a new commanding
officer (CO), Commander Fredricks, took the helm.2
Fredricks was a graduate of the United States Naval Academy, and his
assignment as captain of this Arleigh Burke destroyer put him in an elite class of
officers being groomed for cruiser command. Excepting a major mistake, he was

on track to become an admiral. Fredricks had superior knowledge of ships’
operations, which he flaunted to his sailors. He managed even the most minute
details of the ship’s operations, every situation, and every sailor.
In preparation for the ship’s first missile exercise under Fredericks’s
command, Derek’s team was to ensure that the ship’s weapons systems were 100
percent available. A few days before the exercise, Derek and his peers realized
that the ship was missing a critical part, so the sailors secured it through an
informal network, then repaired the system and returned it to full operation.
Several days later, Fredricks learned of the episode from the CO of a sister ship,
who mentioned in passing that his sailors provided the part. Instead of being
pleased that the young sailors showed initiative and resourcefulness,
Commander Fredricks, evidently embarrassed that his ship required assistance,
was livid. Derek instantly became a target of Fredricks’s wrath and elevated
scrutiny.
During a typical missile exercise, the CO and the ship’s tactical action officer
(TAO) survey the battle area, find the enemy, determine a firing solution, aim,
shoot, and hit the target—all in rapid succession and while being engaged by the
enemy. Hundreds of things happen at once that must be processed, prioritized,
and decided then acted upon. Success requires intense concentration and keen
mental aptitude. These operations can be particularly intimidating because the
commanding officer may be standing inches from the AEGIS operator, watching
every decision and taking constant notes.
Derek and his team now performed these operations under the wary eye of
Fredricks, who publicly mocked their efforts when they failed to immediately
determine firing solutions for assigned targets. In the end, Derek didn’t just
perform poorly in one training evolution, he failed nearly every scenario. He had
been stellar in the classroom and during team training, but as Fredricks loomed
over his shoulder, managed every detail, and found every mistake, the tension
mounted. Derek couldn’t think properly and struggled to perform. As the
scrutiny continued, Derek and his team became less and less capable. Within
weeks, Derek and his chief petty officers were convinced they couldn’t operate
the ship’s combat systems without the CO’s intervention. The failure was so
clear that Fredricks revoked Derek’s qualification to operate the AEGIS console.
After that, Derek’s performance on the ship fell into a tailspin.

This downturn was interrupted only three months later, when the ship received
a new CO. Commander Abbot was also a Naval Academy graduate and was as
confident in his sailors as he was in his own abilities.3 Abbot had worked
previously for a high-ranking defense official who assigned him projects
stretching him to the limits of his ability. Having been briefed of Derek’s
troubles with the previous CO, Abbot quickly sought Derek out and informed
him that they would be taking the ship to sea for another missile exercise before
an extended deployment, saying, “Jones, you are my man in this exercise. Make
sure we’re ready to ace this test. I’m counting on you, and so are your
shipmates.” For a week, Derek’s team flawlessly exercised the AEGIS systems
in every scenario. As they prepared, the new CO provided a watchful eye and
was calm and inquisitive. Derek no longer felt like he was being tested but
rather, that he was learning and working with the CO on a challenge.
On the day of the exercise, the new CO standing behind him, Derek operated
the AEGIS console and provided the correct solutions time after time without
error, achieving the highest score any ship had seen in over a year. Commander
Abbot announced on the ship’s speaker system, “Petty Officer Jones and crew
won the battle for us today.”
Derek continued to advance on the ship. He was made petty officer second
class in record time and became the ship’s Sailor of the Quarter, a high honor.
Abbot placed Derek in the top 5 percent of the crew and nominated him for the
STA-21, or Seaman to Admiral program, where he would earn his college
degree and a commission as a naval officer. Upon completing officer training,
Derek was promoted each time his record was reviewed. In less than nine years,
he was selected to become an executive officer, training and cultivating other
officers. Today, he serves in the US Navy as a lieutenant commander, and is
destined for success as a commanding officer.
Derek’s navy experience illustrates that a change in command can often cause
a change in capability. He was stupefied with fear under one leader, but smart
and capable under another. What did Fredricks say and do that so diminished
Derek’s intelligence and capability? And what did Abbot do that restored and
expanded Derek’s ability to reason and navigate complexity?
Some leaders make us better and smarter. They bring out our intelligence.
This book is about these leaders, who access and revitalize the intelligence in the

people around them. I call them Multipliers. This book will show you why they
create genius around them and make everyone smarter and more capable.

Questioning Genius
There are bird watchers and there are whale watchers. I’m a genius watcher. I
am fascinated by the intelligence of others. I notice it, study it, and have learned
to identify a variety of types of intelligence. Oracle Corporation, the software
giant worth $174 billion, was a great place for genius watching. In the seventeen
years I worked in senior management at Oracle, I was fortunate to work
alongside many intelligent executives, all systematically recruited from the best
companies and the elite universities as top performers. Because I worked as the
vice president responsible for the company’s global talent development strategy
and ran the corporate university, I worked closely with these executives and had
a front-row seat to study their leadership. From this vantage point, I began to
observe how they used their intelligence in very different ways, and I became
intrigued by the effect they had on the people in their organizations.

The Problem with Genius
Some leaders seemed to drain intelligence and capability out of the people
around them. Their focus on their own intelligence and their resolve to be the
smartest person in the room had a diminishing effect on everyone else. For them
to look smart, other people had to end up looking dumb. We’ve all worked with
these black holes. They create a vortex that sucks energy out of everyone and
everything around them. When they walk into a room, the shared IQ drops and
the length of the meeting doubles. In countless settings, these leaders were idea
killers and energy destroyers. Other people’s ideas suffocated and died in their
presence and the flow of intelligence came to an abrupt halt around them.
Around these leaders, intelligence flowed only one way: from them to others.
Other leaders used their intelligence as a tool rather than a weapon. They
applied their intelligence to amplify the smarts and capability of people around
them. People got smarter and better in their presence. Ideas grew, challenges
were surmounted, hard problems were solved. When these leaders walked into a
room, lightbulbs started switching on over people’s heads. Ideas flew so fast that
you had to replay the meeting in slow motion just to see what was going on.
Meetings with them were idea mash-up sessions. These leaders seemed to make
everyone around them better and more capable. These leaders weren’t just
intelligent themselves—they were intelligence Multipliers.
Perhaps these leaders understood that the person sitting at the apex of the
intelligence hierarchy is the genius maker, not the genius.

Post-Oracle Therapy
The idea for this book emerged from my post-Oracle therapy. Leaving Oracle
was like stepping off a high-speed bullet train and suddenly finding everything
moving in slow motion. This sudden calm created space for me to ponder about
the lingering question: How do some leaders create intelligence around them,
while others diminish it?
As I began teaching and coaching executives, I saw the same dynamic playing
out in other companies. Some leaders seemed to boost the collective IQ while
others sucked the mental life out of their employees. I found myself working
with highly intelligent executives who were struggling with their own tendency

to either overtly or subtly shut down the people around them. I also worked with
many senior leaders struggling to make better use of their resources. Most of
these leaders had developed their leadership skills during times of growth.
However, in a more austere business climate, they found themselves unable to
solve problems by simply throwing more resources at them. They needed to find
ways to boost the productivity of the people they already had.
I recall one particularly pivotal conversation with a client named Dennis
Moore, a senior executive with a genius-level IQ. As we discussed how leaders
can have an infectious effect on the intelligence in their organization and spark
viral intelligence, he responded, “These leaders are like amplifiers. They are
intelligence amplifiers.”
Yes, certain leaders amplify intelligence. These leaders, whom we have come
to call Multipliers, create collective, viral intelligence in organizations. Other
leaders act as Diminishers and deplete the organization of crucial intelligence
and capability. But what is it that Multipliers do? And what do Multipliers do
differently than Diminishers?
Scouring business school journals and the Internet looking for answers to
these questions, as well as for resources for clients, yielded only frustration. This
void set the course for my research into this phenomenon. I was determined to
find answers for leaders wanting to multiply the intelligence of their
organizations.

The Research
The first major discovery was finding my research partner, Greg McKeown, who
was studying at Stanford University’s Graduate School of Business. Greg has a
curious and tenacious mind and a passion for leadership that gave him my same
measure of determination to find the answers. We began our formal research by
defining the question that would consume us for the next two years: What are the
vital few differences between intelligence Diminishers and intelligence
Multipliers, and what impact do they have on organizations? Waking up for 730
days with the same question was like the movie Groundhog Day, in which Bill
Murray wakes each day to the same time and song on his alarm clock, destined
to repeat the events of the previous day. In the singular and prolonged pursuit of
this question, we developed a deep understanding of the Multiplier effect.
We began our research by selecting a set of companies and industries in which
individual and organizational intelligence provide a competitive advantage.
Because these organizations rise or fall based on the strength of their intellectual
assets, we assumed the Multiplier effect would be pronounced. We interviewed
senior professionals inside these organizations, asking them to identify two
leaders, one who fit the description of a Multiplier and one a Diminisher. We
studied more than 150 of the resulting leaders through interviews and a
quantitative assessment of their leadership practices. For many leaders, we then
followed an intensive 360-degree interview process with both former and current
members of their management teams.
As our research expanded, we studied additional leaders from other
companies and industries, looking for common elements that spanned the
business and nonprofit sectors as well as geographies. Our research journey took
us across four continents and introduced us to an incredibly rich and diverse set
of leaders. We came to know some of these leaders quite well, studying them
and their organizations in depth.
Two of the leaders we studied provided a sharp contrast between these two
leadership styles. They both worked for the same company and in the same role.
One had the Midas touch of a Multiplier and the other had the chilling effect of a
Diminisher.

A Tale of Two Managers
Vikram4 worked as an engineering manager under two different division
managers at Intel. Each leader could be considered a genius. Both had a
profound impact on Vikram. The first leader was George Schneer, a division
manager for one of Intel’s businesses.

Manager No. 1: The Genius Maker
George had a reputation for running successful businesses at Intel. Every
business he ran was profitable and grew under his leadership. But what most
distinguished George was the impact he had on the people around him.
Vikram said, “I was a rock star around George. He made me. Because of him I
transitioned from an individual contributor to big-time manager. Around him, I
felt like a smart SOB—everyone felt like that. He got 100 percent from me—it
was exhilarating.” George’s team echoed the same sentiments: “We are not sure
exactly what George did, but we knew we were smart and we were winning.
Being on this team was the highlight of our careers.”
George grew people’s intelligence by engaging it. He wasn’t the center of
attention and didn’t worry about how smart he looked. What George worried
about was extracting the smarts and maximum effort from each member of his
team. In a typical meeting, he spoke only about 10 percent of the time, mostly
just to “crisp up” the problem statement. He would then back away and give his
team space to figure out an answer. Often the ideas his team would generate
were worth millions. George’s team drove the business to achieve outstanding
revenue growth and to deliver the profit bridge that allowed Intel to enter the
microprocessor business.

Manager No. 2: The Genius
Several years later, Vikram moved out of George’s group and went to work for a
second division manager, who had been the architect of one of the early
microprocessors. This second manager was a brilliant scientist who had now
been promoted into management to run the plant that produced the chips. He was
highly intelligent by every measure and left his mark on everyone and

everything around him.
The problem was that this leader did all the thinking. Vikram said, “He was
very, very smart. But people had a way of shutting down around him. He just
killed our ideas. In a typical team meeting, he did about 30 percent of the talking
and left little space for others. He gave a lot of feedback—most of it was about
how bad our ideas were.”
This manager made all the decisions himself or with a single confidant. He
would then announce those decisions to the organization. Vikram said, “You
always knew he would have an answer for everything. He had really strong
opinions and put his energy into selling his ideas to others and convincing them
to execute on the details. No one else’s opinion mattered.”
This manager hired intelligent people, but they soon realized that they didn’t
have permission to think for themselves. Eventually, they would quit or threaten
to quit. Ultimately Intel hired a second-in-command to work alongside this
manager to counter the intelligence drain on the organization. But even then,
Vikram said, “My job was more like cranking than creating. He really only got
from me about 50 percent of what I had to offer. And I would never work for
him again!”

Diminisher or Multiplier?
The second leader was so absorbed in his own intelligence that he stifled others
and diluted the organization’s crucial intelligence and capability. George brought
out the intelligence in others and created collective, viral intelligence in his
organization. One leader was a genius. The other was a genius maker.
It isn’t how much you know that matters. What matters is how much access
you have to what other people know. It isn’t just how intelligent your team
members are; it is how much of that intelligence you can draw out and put to
use.
We’ve all experienced these two types of leaders. What type of leader are you
right now? Are you a genius, or are you a genius maker?

The Multiplier Effect
Multipliers are genius makers. What we mean by that is that they make everyone
around them smarter and more capable. Multipliers invoke each person’s unique
intelligence and create an atmosphere of genius—innovation, productive effort,
and collective intelligence.
In studying Multipliers and Diminishers, we learned that at the most
fundamental level, they get dramatically different results from their people, they
hold a different logic and set of assumptions about people’s intelligence, and
they do a small number of things very differently. Let’s first examine the impact
of the Multiplier effect. Why do people get smarter and more capable around
Multipliers? And how do they get twice as much from their resources as do the
Diminishers?
Multipliers get more from their people because they are leaders who look
beyond their own genius and focus their energy on extracting and extending the
genius of others. And they don’t get just a little more back; they get vastly more.

2× Multiplier Effect
The impact of a Multiplier can be seen in two ways: first, from the point of view
of the people they work with, and second, from the point of view of the
organizations they shape and create. Let’s begin by examining how Multipliers
influence the people who work around them.

Extracting Intelligence
Multipliers extract all of the capability from people. In our interviews, people
told us that Multipliers got a lot more out of them than Diminishers. We asked
each person to identify the percentage of their capability that a Diminisher
received from them. The numbers typically ranged between 20 and 50 percent.
When we asked them to identify the percentage of their capability that the
Multiplier extracted, the numbers typically fell between 70 and 100 percent.5
When we compared the two sets of data, we were amazed to find that Multipliers
got 1.97 times more. That represents an almost twofold increase—a 2× effect.
After concluding our formal research, we continued to pose this question in
workshops and with management teams, asking people to reflect on their past
Multiplier and Diminisher bosses. Across industries and in the public, private,
and nonprofit sectors, we continued to find that Multipliers get at least two times
more from people.
What could you accomplish if you could get twice as much from your people?
The reason for the difference is that when people work with Multipliers, they
hold nothing back. They offer the very best of their thinking, creativity, and
ideas. They give more than their jobs require and volunteer their discretionary
effort, energy, and resourcefulness. They actively search for more valuable ways
to contribute. They hold themselves to the highest standards. They give 100
percent of their abilities to the work—and then some.

Extending Intelligence
Not only do Multipliers extract capability and intelligence from people, they
do it in a way that extends and grows that intelligence. In interviews, people
often said Multipliers accessed more than 100 percent of their capability.
Initially, I pushed back when they would say, “Oh, they got 120 percent from
me,” pointing out that getting more than 100 percent is mathematically
impossible. But we continued to hear people claim Multipliers got more than
100 percent from them, and we began to ask: Why would people insist that
intelligence Multipliers got more out of them than they actually had?
Our research confirmed that Multipliers not only access people’s current
capability, they stretch it. They get more from people than they knew they had to
give. People reported actually getting smarter around Multipliers.
The implication of our research is that intelligence itself can grow. This is an
insight that is corroborated by other recent research into the extensible nature of
intelligence. Consider a few recent studies:
Carol Dweck of Stanford University has conducted groundbreaking
research showing that children given a series of progressively harder
puzzles and praised for their intelligence stagnate for fear of reaching
the limit of their intelligence. Children given the same series of puzzles
but then praised for their hard work actually increased their ability to
reason and to solve problems. When these children were recognized for
their efforts to think, they created a belief, and then a reality, that
intelligence grows.6
Eric Turkheimer of the University of Virginia has found that bad
environments suppress children’s IQs. When poor children were
adopted into upper-middle-class households, their IQs rose 12 to 18
points.7
Richard Nisbett of the University of Michigan has reviewed studies that
show: 1) students’ IQ levels drop over summer vacation, and 2) IQ
levels across society have steadily increased over time. The average IQ
of people in 1917 would amount to a mere 73 on today’s IQ test.8
After reading these studies, I recalculated the data from our research

interviews at face value, using the literal percentage of capability that people
claimed Multipliers received from them. When factoring this excess capability
(the amount beyond 100 percent) into our calculations, we found that Multipliers
actually get 2.1 times more than Diminishers. What if you got not only 2× more
from your team—everything they had to give—but also a 5 to 10 percent growth
bonus because they were getting smarter and more capable while working for
you?
This 2× effect is a result of the deep leverage Multipliers get from their
resources. When you extrapolate the 2× Multiplier effect to the organization, you
begin to see the strategic relevance. Simply said, resource leverage creates
competitive advantage.

Resource Leverage
Let’s take the example of Tim Cook, currently CEO of Apple Inc. When Tim
was COO and opened a budget review in one sales division, he reminded the
management team that the strategic imperative was revenue growth. Everyone
expected this, but they were astounded when he asked for the growth without
providing additional headcount. The sales executive at the meeting said he
thought the revenue target was attainable but only with more headcount. He
suggested they follow a proven linear model of incremental headcount growth,
insisting that everyone knows that more revenue means you need more
headcount. The two executives continued the conversation for months, never
fully able to bridge their logic. The sales executive was speaking the language of
addition (that is, higher growth by adding more resources). Tim was speaking
the language of multiplication (that is, higher growth by better utilizing the
resources that already exist).

The Logic of Addition
This is the dominant logic that has existed in corporate planning: that
resources will be added when new requests are made. Senior executives ask for
more output and the next layer of operational leaders request more headcount.
The negotiations go back and forth until everyone settles on a scenario such as:
20 percent more output with 5 percent more resources. Neither the senior
executive nor the operational leaders are satisfied.
Operational leaders entrenched in the logic of resource allocation and addition
argue:
1. Our people are overworked.
2. Our best people are the most maxed out.
3. Therefore, accomplishing a bigger task requires the addition of more

resources.
This is the logic of addition. It seems persuasive but, importantly, it ignores
the opportunity to more deeply leverage existing resources. The logic of addition
creates a scenario in which people become both overworked and underutilized.
To argue for allocation without giving attention to resource leverage is an
expensive corporate norm.
Business school professors and strategy gurus Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad
have written, “The resource allocation task of top management has received too
much attention when compared to the task of resource leverage. . . . If top
management devotes more effort to assessing the strategic feasibility of projects
in its allocation role than it does to the task of multiplying resource
effectiveness, its value-added will be modest indeed.”9
Picture children at a buffet line. They load up on food, but a lot of it is left on
the plate uneaten. The food gets picked at and pushed around, but it is left to go
to waste. Like these children, Diminishers are eager to load up on resources, and
they might even get the job done, but many people are left unused, their
capability wasted. Consider the costs of one high-flying product development
executive at a technology firm.
THE HIGH-COST DIMINISHER Jasper Wallis10 talked a good game. He was smart

and could articulate a compelling vision for his products and their
transformational benefits for customers. Jasper was also politically savvy and
knew how to play politics. The problem was that Jasper’s organization could not
execute and realize the promise of his vision because employees were in a
perpetual spin cycle, spinning around him.
Jasper was a strategist and an idea man. However, his brain worked faster and
produced more ideas than his organization could execute. Every week or so, he
would launch a new focus or a new initiative. His director of operations recalled,
“He’d tell us on Monday, we needed to catch up with ‘competitor X,’ and we
needed to get it done this week.” The organization would scurry, throw a Hail
Mary pass, make progress for a few days, but eventually lose traction when they
were given a new goal to chase the following week.
This leader was so heavily involved in the details that he became a bottleneck
in the organization. He worked extremely hard, but his organization moved
slowly. His need to micromanage limited what the rest of the organization could
contribute. His need to put his personal stamp on everything wasted resources
and meant his division of 1,000 was only operating at about 500 strong.
Jasper’s modus operandi was to compete for resources with a larger division
in the company that produced similar technology. Jasper’s overriding goal was
to outsize the other division. He hired people at a breakneck pace and built his
own internal infrastructure and staff—all of which was redundant with existing
infrastructure in the other division. He even convinced the company to build a
dedicated office tower for his division.
Things eventually caught up with Jasper. It became clear that his products
were hype and the company was losing market share. When the real return on
investment (ROI) calculation was made, he was removed from the company and
his division was folded into the other product group. The duplicate infrastructure
he built was eventually removed, but only after many millions of dollars had
been wasted and opportunities lost in the market.
Diminishers come at a high cost.

The Logic of Multiplication
We have examined the logic of addition and the resource inefficiencies that
follow from it. Better leverage and utilization of resources at the organizational
level require adopting a new corporate logic, based on multiplication. Instead of
achieving linear growth by adding new resources, leaders rooted in the logic of
multiplication believe that you can more efficiently extract the capability of your
people and watch growth skyrocket by multiplying the power of the resources
you have.
Here is the logic behind multiplication:
1. Most people in organizations are underutilized.
2. All capability can be leveraged with the right kind of leadership.
3. Therefore, intelligence and capability can be multiplied without requiring

a bigger investment.
For example, when Apple Inc. needed to achieve rapid growth with flat
resources in one division, they didn’t expand their sales force. Instead, they
gathered the key players across the various job functions, took a week to study
the problem, and collaboratively developed a solution. They changed the sales
model to utilize competency centers and better leverage their best salespeople
and deep industry experts in the sales cycle. They achieved year-over-year
growth in the double digits with virtually flat resources.
Salesforce, a $7 billion software firm that has pioneered software as a service,
has been making the shift from the logic of addition to the logic of
multiplication. They enjoyed a decade of outstanding growth using the old idea
of “throwing resources at a problem.” They addressed new customers and new
demands by hiring the best technical and business talent available and deploying
them on the challenges. However, a strained market environment created a new
imperative for the company’s leadership: get more productivity from their
currently available resources. They could no longer operate on outdated notions
of resource utilization. They started developing leaders who could multiply the
intelligence and capability of the people around them and increase the
brainpower of the organization to meet their growth demands.
Resource leverage is a far richer concept than merely “accomplishing more

with less.” Multipliers don’t get more with less; they get more by using more.
More of people’s intelligence and capability, enthusiasm and trust. As one CEO
put it, “Eighty people can either operate with the productivity of fifty or they can
operate as though they were five hundred.” And because these Multipliers
achieve better resource efficiency, they enjoy a strengthened competitive
position against companies entrenched in the logic of addition.
We want to strike at the root of the outdated addition logic. Let’s turn to the
question of how Multipliers access intelligence and get so much from people.
The answer is in the mindset and the five disciplines of the Multiplier.

The Mind of the Multiplier
As we studied Diminishers and Multipliers, we consistently found that they hold
radically different assumptions about the intelligence of the people they work
with. These assumptions appear to explain much of the difference in how
Diminishers and Multipliers operate.
THE MIND OF THE DIMINISHER. The Diminisher’s view of intelligence is based on

elitism and scarcity. Diminishers appear to believe that really intelligent people
are a rare breed and that they are of that rare breed. From this assumption they
conclude that they are so special, other people will never figure things out
without them.
I recall a leader I worked with whom I can only describe as an “intellectual
supremacist.” This senior executive ran a technology organization employing
more than 4,000 highly educated knowledge workers, most of them graduates of
top universities from around the world. I joined one of his management
meetings, in which twenty members of his senior management team were
troubleshooting an important go-to-market problem for one of their products.
As we walked out of the meeting, we were reflecting on the conversation and
the decisions made. He stopped, turned to me, and calmly said, “In meetings, I
typically only listen to a couple of people. No one else really has anything to
offer.” I think he saw the alarm on my face because after his words came out, he
added the awkward postscript, “Well, of course, you are one of these people.” I
doubted it. Out of the top twenty managers representing a division of 4,000
people, he believed only a couple had anything to offer. As we walked down the
hallway, we passed by rows and rows of cubicles and offices occupied by his
staff. Seen through new eyes, this expanse now suddenly looked like a massive
brainpower wasteland. I wanted to make a public announcement and tell them all
that they could go home since their senior executive didn’t think they had much
to offer.
In addition to seeing intelligence as a scarce commodity, our research showed
that Diminishers regard intelligence as something basic about a person that can’t
change much; they believe it is static, not able to change over time or

circumstance. This attitude is consistent with what Dr. Carol Dweck, noted
psychologist and author, calls a “fixed mindset,” a belief that one’s intelligence
and qualities are carved in stone.11 Diminishers’ two-step logic appears to be
that people who don’t “get it” now, never will; therefore, I’ll need to keep doing
the thinking for everyone. In the Diminisher world, there is no vacation for the
smart people!
You can probably predict how the executive described above actually
operated on a day-to-day basis. You might ask yourself how you would operate
if, deep down, you held these beliefs. You would probably tell people what to
do, make all the important decisions, and jump in and take over when someone
appeared to be failing. And in the end, you would almost always be right,
because your assumptions would cause you to manage in a way that produced
subordination and dependency.
THE MIND OF THE MULTIPLIER. Multipliers hold very different assumptions. If

Diminishers see the world of intelligence in black-and-white, Multipliers see it
in Technicolor. Multipliers have a rich view of the intelligence of the people
around them. They don’t see a world where just a few people deserve to do the
thinking. In addition, Multipliers see intelligence as continually developing. This
observation is consistent with what Dweck calls a “growth mindset,” a belief
that basic qualities like intelligence and ability can be cultivated through effort.12
They assume that people are smart and will figure it out. To their eyes, their
organization is full of talented people who are capable of contributing at much
higher levels. They think like one manager we interviewed who takes stock of
her team members by asking herself, “In what way is this person smart?” In
answering this question, she finds colorful capabilities often hidden just below
the surface. Instead of writing people off as not worth her time, she is able to
ask, “What could be done to develop and grow these capabilities?” She then
finds an assignment that both stretches the individual and furthers the interests of
the organization.
Multipliers look at the complex opportunities and challenges swirling around
them and think, There are smart people everywhere who will figure this out and
get even smarter in the process. And they see that their job is to bring the right
people together in an environment that liberates everyone’s best thinking—and

then to get out of their way and let them do it!
How would you operate if you held these assumptions? In the most trying
times, you would trust your people; you would extend hard challenges to them
and allow them space to fulfill their responsibilities. You would access their
intelligence in a way that would actually make them smarter.
The chart below summarizes how these very different sets of assumptions
have a powerful effect on the way Diminishers and Multipliers lead others:

These core assumptions are essential to unearth and understand because, quite
simply, behavior follows assumptions. If someone wants to lead like a
Multiplier, he or she can’t simply mimic the practices of the Multiplier. An
aspiring Multiplier must start by thinking like a Multiplier. In twenty years of
watching and coaching executives, I have observed how leaders’ assumptions
affect their management. When someone begins by examining and potentially
upgrading their core assumptions, they will more easily adopt the five disciplines
of the Multiplier with authenticity and impact.

The Five Disciplines of the Multiplier
So what are the practices that distinguish the Multiplier? In analyzing data on
more than 150 leaders, we found a number of areas in which Multipliers and
Diminishers do the same things. Both groups are customer driven. Both show
strong business acumen and market insight. Both surround themselves with
smart people and consider themselves thought leaders. However, as we searched
the data for the active ingredients unique to Multipliers, we found five
disciplines in which Multipliers differentiate themselves from Diminishers.

1. ATTRACTING AND OPTIMIZING TALENT. Multipliers are Talent Magnets; they

attract and deploy talent to its fullest, regardless of who owns the resource, and
people flock to work with them because they know they will grow and be
successful. In contrast, Diminishers operate as Empire Builders, insisting that
they must own and control all resources to be more productive. They tend to
divide resources into those they own and those they don’t, and then allow these
artificial separations to hamstring effective use of all resources and restrict
growth. People may initially be attracted to work with a Diminisher, but it is
often the place where people’s careers die.
The Diminisher is an Empire Builder who acquires resources and then wastes
them. The Multiplier is a Talent Magnet who utilizes and increases everyone’s
genius.
2. CREATING INTENSITY THAT REQUIRES BEST THINKING. Multipliers establish a

unique and highly motivating work environment where everyone has permission
to think and the space to do their best work. Multipliers operate as Liberators,
which produces a climate that is both comfortable and intense. They are able to
remove fear and create the safety that invites people to do their best thinking. At
the same time, they are creating an intense environment that demands people’s
best efforts. In contrast, Diminishers operate as Tyrants, introducing judgment
and a fear of judgment, which have a chilling effect on people’s thinking and
work. Diminishers try to demand everyone’s best thinking, yet they don’t get it.
The Diminisher is a Tyrant who creates a stressful environment. The
Multiplier is a Liberator who creates a safe environment that fosters bold
thinking.
Multipliers act as Challengers, continually
challenging themselves and others to push beyond what they know. How do they
do this? They seed opportunities, lay down challenges that stretch the
organization, and, in doing so, generate belief that it can be done and enthusiasm
about the process. In contrast, Diminishers operate as Know-It-Alls, personally
giving directives to showcase their knowledge. While Diminishers set a
direction, Multipliers ensure that a direction gets set.
The Diminisher is a Know-It-All who gives directives. The Multiplier is a
3.

EXTENDING

CHALLENGES.

Challenger who defines opportunities.
4. DEBATING DECISIONS. Multipliers operate as Debate Makers, driving sound

decisions through rigorous debate. The decision-making process they foster
contains all the information the organization needs to be ready to execute those
decisions. Multipliers engage people in debating the issues up front, which leads
to decisions that people understand and can execute efficiently. In contrast,
Diminishers operate as Decision Makers who seem to make decisions efficiently
within a small inner circle, but they leave the broader organization in the dark to
debate the soundness of the leader’s decisions, and with none of the satisfaction
of helping to fine-tune and execute them.
Diminishers are Decision Makers who try to sell their decisions to others.
Multipliers are Debate Makers who generate real buy-in.
5. INSTILLING OWNERSHIP AND ACCOUNTABILITY. Multipliers deliver and sustain

superior results by inculcating high expectations across the organization. They
serve as Investors who provide the necessary resources for success. In addition,
they hold people accountable for their commitments. Over time, Multipliers’
high expectations turn into an unrelenting presence, driving people to hold
themselves and each other accountable, often to higher standards and without the
direct intervention of the Multiplier. In contrast, Diminishers serve as
Micromanagers who drive results by holding on to ownership, jumping into the
details, and directly managing for results.
The Diminisher is a Micromanager who jumps in and out. The Multiplier is an
Investor who gives others ownership and full accountability.
The following chart summarizes the five vital disciplines that differentiate
Diminishers and Multipliers:

THE FIVE DISCIPLINES OF THE
MULTIPLIER

Surprising Findings
As we studied Multipliers across the world, we found a remarkable amount of
consistency and several patterns that confirmed our early observations. Here are
four surprising and intriguing findings that we want to share.

They Have a Hard Edge
One of the most critical insights from our study of Multipliers is how hard-edged
these managers are. They expect great things from their people and drive them to
achieve extraordinary results. They are beyond results-driven; they are tough and
exacting. Indeed, Multipliers make people feel smart and capable, but they don’t
do it by being “feel-good” managers. They look into people and find capability,
and they want to access all of it and utilize people to their fullest. They see a lot,
so they expect a lot.
During our research interviews, people oozed appreciation for the Multipliers
they had worked with, but the gratitude was rooted in the deep satisfaction found
in working with them, not in the pleasantries of a relationship. One person
described working with Deb Lange, a senior vice president of taxation at a large
firm: “Working with her was like an intense workout. It was exhausting but
totally exhilarating.” Another said of his manager: “He got things from me I
didn’t know I had to give. I would do almost anything to not disappoint him.”
An executive who reported to Derek Williams, executive vice president of
Oracle’s Asia Pacific region, put it this way: “When you left his office you felt
so much taller.”
The Multiplier approach to management isn’t just an enlightened view of
leadership. It is an approach that delivers higher performance because it gets
vastly more out of people and returns to them a richly satisfying experience. As
one early reader of this book noted, these leaders aren’t about “cupcakes and
kisses.”

They Don’t Play Small
People often assume that Multiplier leaders have to step to the side in order to
shine a spotlight on others, or that they play small so that others can play big.
However, I found that these leaders not only utilize all of the intelligence and
talent of the people around them, they use all of their own as well. One of my
favorite Multiplier leaders is Magic Johnson. Even back in high school, when he
was just Earvin Johnson Jr., he was a phenomenally talented basketball player.
His high school coach told him, “Earvin, every time you get the ball, I want you
to take the shot.” And so he did—and he scored a lot of points as they won every

game. They would score 54 points, and Earvin would have made 52 of them.
The coach loved it, and the players loved it, because what boy doesn’t want to be
on an undefeated team? But then after one particular game, as the players were
leaving the gym and heading out to their cars, Earvin noticed the faces of the
parents who had come to watch their sons play basketball but instead ended up
watching this superstar. He said, “I made a decision at this very young age that I
would use my God-given talent to help everyone on the team be a better
player.”13 And this decision eventually earned him the nickname Magic—for his
ability to raise the level of excellence of every team he ever played on and of
every person on those teams. It’s not that these Multipliers shrink so that others
can be big. It’s that they play in a way that invites others to play big, too.

They Have a Great Sense of Humor
On a whim, we added “Great Sense of Humor” to our leadership survey. Our
suspicion proved right. Not only is this trait prominent among Multipliers, it is
one of the traits that is most negatively correlated with the mindset held by
Diminishers. Multipliers aren’t necessarily comedians, but they don’t take
themselves or situations too seriously. Perhaps because they don’t need to
defend their own intelligence, Multipliers can laugh at themselves and see
comedy in error and in life’s foibles, and their sense of humor has a liberating
effect on others. Multiple workplace studies conclude that humor strengthens
relationships, reduces stress, and increases empathy. Those who work in a fun
environment have greater productivity, interpersonal effectiveness, and call in
sick less often.14 Leaders who operate with a sense of humor create an
environment where people can contribute at their fullest.
Think of George Clooney when you think of the humor of the Multiplier—it’s
a self-deprecating wit and an ability to put others at ease, allowing people to be
themselves. As one journalist wrote of Clooney, “After fifteen minutes, he made
me feel comfortable in my own house.”15 A Clooney costar said, “He has a way
of daring you . . . which can be irresistible.” Multipliers use humor to create
comfort and to spark the natural energy and intelligence of others.

The Accidental Diminisher
Perhaps one of our biggest surprises was realizing how few Diminishers
understood the restrictive impact they were having on others. Most of them had
grown up praised for their personal intelligence and had moved up the
management ranks on account of personal—and often intellectual—merit. When
they became “the boss,” they assumed it was their job to be the smartest and to
manage a set of “subordinates.” Others had once had the mind and even the heart
of the Multiplier, but they had been working among Diminishers for so long that
they inherited many of their practices and absorbed their worldview. As one
executive put it, “When I read your findings, I realized that I have been living in
Diminisher land so long that I have gone native.” Many people have worked for
Diminishers and, although they may have escaped unscathed, they carry some of
the residual effects in their own leadership. The good news for the Accidental
Diminisher is that there is a viable path to becoming a Multiplier. Chapter 7,
“The Accidental Diminisher,” is for well-meaning, decent managers who are
underutilizing their people, despite having the very best intentions.

The Promise of This Book
As we studied Multipliers and Diminishers, we heard case after case of smart
individuals being underutilized by their leaders. We heard their frustration as
they told us how little some leaders got from them, despite how hard they were
working and how they tried to give more. We learned that it is indeed possible to
be both overworked and underutilized. Latent talent exists everywhere.
Organizations are replete with underchallenged resources.
Multipliers are out there, and they know how to find this dormant intelligence,
challenge it, and put it to use at its fullest. Great Multipliers exist in business, in
education, in nonprofits, and in government. Consider just a few whom you will
learn more about later.
1. K. R. Sridhar, successful green-tech entrepreneur and CEO, who recruits

A+ talent, then gives them an environment with a lot of pressure but
very little stress, and allows them to experiment and take risks until the
right technology and solutions emerge.
2. Alyssa Gallagher, an assistant superintendent who led a charge to
revolutionize learning across her school district by giving ownership to
the teachers and letting them be the revolutionaries.
3. Lutz Ziob, general manager of Microsoft Learning, whose team says of
him, “He creates an environment where good things happen. He recruits
great people, allows them to make mistakes, and ferociously debates the
important decisions. He demands our best, but then shares the success
with the whole team.”
4. Sue Siegel, former biotech president turned venture capitalist, whose
business partner described “a Sue effect. Everything around her gets
better and companies grow under her guidance. I often wonder what
people are like when they aren’t around Sue.”
5. Larry Gelwix, head coach of Highland Rugby, whose high school varsity
team’s record is 392 wins and just nine losses in thirty-four years. He
attributes this extraordinary record to a deliberate leadership philosophy
that engages the intelligence of his players on and off the field.

Leaders like these provide an aspiration point for those who would be
Multipliers.
The promise is simple: You can be a Multiplier. You can create genius around
you and receive a higher contribution from your people. You can choose to think
like a Multiplier and operate like one. This book will show you how. And it will
show you why it matters.
This is a book for every manager trying to navigate the resource strain of
tough economic times. It is a message for leaders who must accomplish more by
getting more out of their people. As companies shed excess resources, the need
for leaders who can multiply the intelligence and capability around them is more
vital than ever. This book is also for the raging Multiplier who seeks to better
understand what he or she does naturally, as well as for the aspiring Multiplier
who wishes to get the full capability and intelligence from his or her people. And
it is most certainly for the Diminishers, so they can better understand the
negative effects of leadership centered on their own intelligence. It is for every
manager seeking the promise of the Multiplier: to increase intelligence
everywhere and with everyone.
As you read, you will find a few central messages:
1. Diminishers underutilize people and leave capability on the table.
2. Multipliers increase intelligence in people and in organizations. People

actually get smarter and more capable around them.
3. Multipliers leverage their resources. Corporations can get 2× more from
their resources by turning their most intelligent resources into
intelligence Multipliers.
Before turning our attention to the practices of the Multiplier, let’s clarify
what this book is not. It is not a prescription for a nice-guy, feel-good model of
leadership. Rather, this book discusses a hard-edged approach to management
that allows people to contribute more of their abilities. And although there will
be much discussion of Multipliers and Diminishers, this book isn’t about what
they achieve themselves. It is about the impact that these leaders have on others.
It is about the impact and the promise of the Multiplier. And lastly, the ideas
offered here are not intended to be terms for labeling your diminishing boss and

your colleagues. Rather, I offer a framework for helping you to develop the
practices of a Multiplier.
This book has been designed as an end-to-end learning experience, offering an
opportunity to both understand and implement the Multiplier ideas. This
introduction has provided a first glance into the Multiplier effect and an
overview of what Multipliers do. Succeeding chapters will clarify the differences
between Multipliers and Diminishers and will present the five disciplines of the
Multiplier and how you can minimize your Accidental Diminisher tendencies.
You’ll also gain a set of strategies for dealing with the inevitable Diminishers
around you. You will read stories of real Multipliers and Diminishers, but be
aware that we’ve changed the Diminishers’ names and the names of their
companies, for rather obvious reasons. The book concludes with a road map for
becoming a Multiplier leader and for building a Multiplier culture across an
entire enterprise.

My Challenge to You
Although the Multiplier/Diminisher framework might appear binary, I wish to
emphasize that there is a continuum between Multipliers and Diminishers, with
just a small number of people at either polar extreme. Our research showed that
most of us fall along this spectrum and have the ability to move toward the side
of the Multiplier. With the right intent, the Multiplier approach to leadership can
be developed. The good news is that 1) Multipliers are out there, 2) we have
studied them to uncover their secrets, and 3) you can learn to become one. And
not only can you become a Multiplier yourself, you can find and create other
Multipliers. That will make you a Multiplier of Multipliers.
In this spirit, I challenge you to read this book on several levels. At the most
fundamental level, it might illuminate what you undoubtedly have experienced
—that some leaders create genius, while others destroy it. Or you might go
beyond this and reflect on the quintessential Multipliers and Diminishers who
have been part of your career and life experience. But perhaps the best way to
approach the book is to look beyond the idea that you or your colleagues are
Multipliers, and instead spot yourself at times in the guise of Diminisher. The
greatest power of these ideas might be in realizing that you have the mind of a
Multiplier but have been living in a Diminisher world and have lost your way.
Perhaps you are an Accidental Diminisher.
As I have journeyed into the world of Multipliers and Diminishers, I have
often seen glimpses of myself—either in the present or from years past—and
have found ways to better exemplify the Multiplier in my own work teaching
and coaching leaders around the world. I’ve come to see that most of us have a
Diminisher side, or at least a few vulnerabilities, mostly born of the best
intentions. I certainly do. While we may not entirely rid ourselves of our
diminishing tendencies, we can certainly work to string together as many
Multiplier moments as possible.
Multipliers is a guide to those of you who wish to follow the path of the
Multiplier and, like British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, leave those you
meet thinking they, rather than you, are the smartest person in the world. It is a
book for executives who want to seed their organization with more Multipliers

and watch everyone and everything get better.
Let me now introduce you to the fascinating and diverse set of leaders we call
the Multipliers. They come from all walks of life—from corporate boardrooms
and our schools’ classrooms, from the executive suite to the fields of Africa.
And the leaders we’ve selected represent diverse ideologies. I encourage you to
learn from everyone, even those whose political views you do not share. None of
these leaders is perfect, but as we look into some of their finest Multiplier
moments, we can discover new possibilities. I hope you will find their stories,
their practices, and their impact as inspiring as we did when we entered their
worlds.

Chapter One Summary

Multipliers Versus Diminishers
MULTIPLIERS: These leaders are genius makers who bring out the intelligence in

others. They build collective, viral intelligence in organizations.
DIMINISHERS: These leaders are absorbed in their own intelligence, stifle others,

and deplete the organization of crucial intelligence and capability.
The Five Disciplines of the Multipliers
1. The Talent Magnet: Attracts and optimizes talent 2. The Liberator:
Requires people’s best thinking 3. The Challenger: Extends challenges
4. The Debate Maker: Debates decisions 5. The Investor: Instills
accountability The Accidental Diminisher
While true Diminishers are easier to spot, much of the diminishing that
transpires in the workplace is a result of well-intended leaders whose honest
attempts to lead or be helpful shut down ideas and cause others to hold back.
The Results
By extracting people’s full capability, Multipliers get twice the capability from
people as do Diminishers.

TWO

The Talent Magnet

I not only use all the brains that I have, but all that I can borrow.
WOODROW WILSON

When you walk up to the porch of her house in Menlo Park, California, you can
sense that Meg Whitman, CEO of eBay, has spent time on the East Coast. With
its saltbox shape and white wood, the house looks like it should be in New
England. Perhaps it reminds Meg of her time in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
while at business school.
It was September 2007, early in the race for the 2008 presidential nomination.
There were many interesting candidates vying for the ticket for both parties.
That day was a chance for us locals to get a peek at one of the candidates, and
for me, it was a chance to extend our research and gain insight into two
interesting leaders.
As the guests gathered on her backyard lawn, Meg Whitman took the
microphone and began to introduce Mitt Romney as a candidate for president of
the United States. Her introduction was simple.
I was a young consultant at Bain & Company and had the good fortune to
work for Mitt Romney early in my career. After we were hired, all the new
consultants scrambled to get on Mitt’s project teams. Why? The word
spread that he was the best boss to work for because he knew how to lead a
team and he grew his people. Everyone grew around Mitt.

You can imagine Meg, a newly minted Harvard MBA, ready to make her
mark on the business world. Like many MBAs, she chose to begin her career at
Bain & Company, an elite business consulting firm. She knew landing in the
right place inside would determine how quickly she’d learn and advance her
career and her value in the marketplace. She heard from one of the more senior
consultants, “If you’re smart, you’ll find a spot on Mitt Romney’s team.” She
didn’t quite know why Mitt was such a great boss, but, being savvy, she
maneuvered her way onto his team. She learned why when she started working
with him.
On Mitt’s team, people were engaged. He took the time to get to know each
person and to understand the capabilities they brought to the team. This went
well beyond reviewing their résumés. Mitt would determine what people were
naturally good at and find a way to use those talents with the client engagement.
In assigning people to roles, Mitt asked questions like “What is the next
challenge for you? What would be a stretch assignment?” It wasn’t unusual for
someone on Mitt’s team to be loaned to another group if their skills could help
rescue a troubled project. In one-on-one meetings, Mitt not only asked about the
status of project deliverables, he asked about the blockers. A favorite question
was “What is getting in the way of your being successful?”
Meanwhile, many of Meg’s colleagues didn’t get the same guidance and
found themselves working for company leaders who appeared more concerned
with advancing their own careers than growing the people on their team. Team
meetings typically consisted of long briefings from project leaders, followed by
the usual project updates from each of the consultants, who reported on progress
in their functional area. People stuck to their roles on the team. When one person
was struggling, he or she usually just suffered in silence and pulled a few allnighters rather than solicit help from colleagues. The job got done, but individual
efforts were not acknowledged. The only visible recognition came in the form of
kudos for the project leader and an increase in the size of his or her organization.
As for the destiny of the project members, they were almost certainly guaranteed
a role on the next project that closely resembled what they had done on the last
project.
In any organization, there are Talent Magnets, people who attract the best
talent, utilize it to its fullest, and ready it for the next stage. These are leaders

who have a reputation not only for delivering results but for creating a place
where young, talented people can grow. They are accelerators to other people’s
careers.
Mitt Romney operated as a Talent Magnet. He accelerated the career of Meg
Whitman, who went on to be CEO of eBay and lead an eighty-eight times
increase in revenue. And Mitt has been a magnet and an accelerator in the
careers of hundreds of people with similar stories, not only Meg.
Perhaps you are a Talent Magnet. Would your people describe you as
someone who recognizes talented people, draws them in, and utilizes them at
their fullest? Would they say they have grown more around you than with any
other manager they have worked for? Or would they describe you as someone
who pulled them into your organization not as a talent to be developed, but more
as a resource to be deployed, and then left to languish? Would they perhaps say
that they were heavily recruited but not given a meaningful role—just a visible
role—and were serving as a showpiece or hood ornament in your organization?
Some leaders are like magnets that draw in talent and develop it to its fullest.
Other leaders acquire resources to build their empire. This chapter explores the
differences between these two approaches to the management of talent and the
impact that both types of leaders have on the people around them.

The Empire Builder Versus the Talent
Magnet
Multipliers operate as Talent Magnets to attract talented people and then use
them to their fullest capacity, that is, working at their highest point of
contribution. Multipliers have access to the best talent, not because they are
necessarily great recruiters but because people flock to work for them. As Meg
Whitman found Mitt Romney, people seek out a Talent Magnet, knowing that
their capabilities will be appreciated and also that their value will appreciate in
the marketplace.
In contrast, Diminishers operate as Empire Builders who hoard resources and
underutilize talent. They bring in top talent and make big promises, but then they
underutilize their people and disenchant them. Why? Because they are often
amassing the resources for self-promotion and their own gain. Empire builders

accumulate rather than multiply; they collect people like knickknacks in a curio
cabinet—on display for everyone to see, but not well utilized.
Each of these approaches produces a self-perpetuating cycle. The Talent
Magnet spawns a virtuous cycle of attraction and the Empire Builder spawns a
vicious cycle of decline.

A Cycle of Attraction
In 1914, when venerated British explorer Ernest Shackleton decided to embark
on an expedition to traverse Antarctica, he placed a recruitment advertisement in
The Times (London), which read:
Men wanted: For hazardous journey. Small wages, bitter cold, long months
of complete darkness, constant danger, safe return doubtful. Honour and
recognition in case of success.
Surprisingly, hundreds of men applied. Shackleton, with the wisdom of an
experienced captain, staffed his crew with men of a certain orientation—men
who were attracted to adventure and recognition but were also realistically
prepared for the hardship they would face. No doubt Shackleton’s ability to
attract the right team was one key factor in the survival of every member of the
expedition.
The cycle of attraction begins with a leader possessing the confidence and
magnetism to surround him-or herself with top talent, or “A players”—sheer raw
talent and the right mix of intelligence needed for the challenge. Under the
leadership of the Talent Magnet, the genius of these players gets discovered and
utilized to the fullest. Having been stretched, these players become smarter and
more capable. A players become A+ players who are positioned in the spotlight
and get kudos and recognition for their work. They attract attention and their
value increases in the talent marketplace, internally or externally. A+ players get
offered even bigger opportunities, and they seize them with the full support of
the Talent Magnet.
And then the cycle kicks into hyperdrive. As this pattern of utilization,
growth, and opportunity continues to occur, others in the organization and
outside notice, and the leader and the organization get a reputation as a “place to
grow.” This reputation spreads and more A players flock to work in the Talent

Magnet’s organization, so there is a steady flow of talent in the door, replacing
talent growing outward.
This cycle of attraction, outlined below, is exactly what happened to Mitt
Romney at Bain & Company and why Meg Whitman knew to join his
organization.

THE CYCLE OF ATTRACTION

Talent Magnets create a powerful force that attracts talent and then accelerates
the growth of intelligence and capability in others, as well as themselves. These
leaders operate like an electromagnetic force that, through interactions between
atoms, propels matter in the universe.

A Cycle of Decline

For many years, I had the pleasure of working closely with Brian Beckham,1 a
brilliant and affable Canadian. Brian had a reputation for being smart, optimistic,
and collaborative, and could solve just about any complex problem that got
tossed his way. This reputation earned him a key role as the vice president of
operations in a rapidly growing division. The problem was that the division was
run by an uncontrolled Diminisher and determined Empire Builder.
Brian went to work solving the complex problems of the emerging division
but soon found that the senior vice president running the division didn’t really
want the underlying issues addressed. The SVP wanted only to grow an empire!
And he wanted growth at any cost. Brian’s role quickly degenerated into
window dressing, where he and his team were only tweaking issues on the
surface, just enough so the executive committee would continue to fund
additional headcount into the organization.
For many months, while Brian continued to pursue his work at full throttle,
deep problems were festering at the core of the division. With continued
indifference from his manager, Brian became numb and started to settle into
mediocrity. He lost good players on his team. When other leaders in the
company saw the depth of the problems in the division, Brian’s Midas-touch
reputation was tarnished. After several years of hanging in there, hoping for
things to improve, he found himself stuck in a dying organization, watching his
opportunities fade.
Soon Brian became one of the walking dead who roam the halls of so many
organizations. On the outside, these zombies go through the motions, but on the
inside they have given up. This is called “quit and stay.” It was painful to watch
this happen to Brian, whom I knew to be an absolute superstar. No doubt you
have seen this happen to colleagues in other organizations or have even been
there yourself. Is it possible that it is happening inside your own organization?
Empire Builders create a vicious cycle of decline. Talent recruited into their
organization soon becomes disengaged and goes stale. The cycle of decline
begins much like the cycle of attraction (which is why it is easy to be deceived
by Diminishers). Empire Builders seek to surround themselves with A players.
But, unlike Talent Magnets, they accumulate talent to appear smarter and more
powerful. The leader glosses over the real genius of the people while placing
them into boxes on the org chart. The A players have limited impact and start to

look more like A– or B+. They fail to get noticed for their work, and they lose
intellectual confidence. They begin to recede into the shadow of the Empire
Builder. Their value in the job market drops and opportunities begin to
evaporate. So they stay and wait, hoping things will turn around. This cycle of
degeneration impacts not only one person; it infects an entire organization. The
organization becomes an elephant graveyard earning a reputation as “the place
people go to die.” As one technology superstar said of his empty vice president
job, “I’m definitely past my sell-by date here.” The resignation in his voice made
it clear: if he were milk, he’d be curdled.
Empire Builders, having earned their reputation as career killers, continually
struggle to get truly top talent into their organizations. Perhaps this is why they
labor hard to hoard the resources that they have. Empire Builders may initially
be able to attract top talent, but their focus on building themselves and their
organizations underutilizes the true talent that they have in their organization and
renders it stagnant and inert.
They generate a cycle of decline that spirals downward as illustrated on the
following page.
Empire Builders hoard resources and underutilize talent. Talent Magnets
attract talented people and use them at their highest point of contribution. Let’s
explore the world of the Talent Magnet, these Multipliers who create a cycle of
attraction and grow intelligence around them.

THE CYCLE OF DECLINE

The Talent Magnet
The Talent Magnet creates a cycle of attraction that accelerates performance and
grows genius. But does this only work for top talent and for the A players in the
market? Or can a true Talent Magnet find and grow genius everywhere and with
everyone?
Hexal AG, a maker of generic drugs, is located in a small village close to
Munich, Germany. Hexal was founded in 1986 by Thomas and Andreas
Strüengmann, twin brothers and self-made entrepreneurs. Andreas, a doctor, is
the medical authority, and Thomas is the international marketing genius behind
Hexal. These brothers teamed their expertise to build a successful generic drug
company, growing primarily from the local talent pool in the village. What
makes the company unique is that its approach to talent is anything but generic,

and it is an approach that gets extraordinary results from very ordinary people.
It starts with how these leaders hire people into their company. They
explained, “When we consider each person, we ask one or two questions. If they
don’t fit, we simply don’t continue the conversation. If the person is
individualistic, we know that he or she won’t fit in our culture. When we find
someone who will fit with our company, then we spend a lot of time with this
person to make sure we understand their capability and what they would bring to
our organization.” The Strüengmann brothers knew how to spot and attract the
right talent.
Once people joined Hexal, they discovered another one of the Strüengmanns’
unconventional practices. Hexal doesn’t have jobs per se, and they don’t have an
org chart. This isn’t like some elite organizations that choose not to publish their
org chart for fear that some other company will snatch up their talent. Hexal
didn’t have an org chart because the Strüengmanns didn’t believe in them. Jobs
were loosely created around people’s interests and unique capabilities. They
called their approach the “ameba model.” Here’s how it works.
Ursula’s responsibility was to assist the customer services manager. In her
role, she saw a large number of repetitive requests for the same action and was
continually updating people on the status of these requests. She had an idea to
use the Internet to create a workflow tracking system. She wrote up a little
proposal and sent the idea around to her colleagues in an email asking, “What do
you think about it?” Some people replied on email and others stopped by her
desk to discuss it in person, but everyone agreed that it was a good idea and
wanted to see it happen. She gathered the people she needed, secured some
budget, and got the system built through this makeshift team. The team then
presented the system to the Strüengmann brothers, who applauded their efforts
and Ursula’s leadership and initiative. These twin brothers simply believed that
if an idea got support from a lot of people, it was a good idea. At Hexal, you
could work wherever there was energy.
Through encouraging their employees to use this heat-seeking approach, they
were able to utilize people at their highest point of contribution. They didn’t box
people into jobs and limit their contribution. They let people work where they
had ideas and energy and where they could best contribute. They let talent flow,
like an ameba, to the right opportunities.

There are clearly multiple reasons for their success, but it is interesting to note
that the Strüengmann brothers sold Hexal (along with holdings in another
company) to Novartis in 2005 for $7.6 billion; at age fifty-five, they were each
worth $3.8 billion. As they led Hexal, the Strüengmann brothers got
extraordinary results from very ordinary people. Why? Because these twin
Talent Magnets knew how to unleash people’s genius into their organization.
How does a Talent Magnet find and unleash genius? In the four practices of
the Talent Magnet, we find some of the answers.

The Four Practices of the Talent Magnet
Among the Multipliers we studied in our research, we found four active
practices that together catalyze and sustain this cycle of attraction. These Talent
Magnets: 1) look for talent everywhere; 2) find people’s native genius; 3) utilize
people at their fullest; and 4) remove the blockers. Let’s look at each to
understand exactly what a Talent Magnet does to create genius in others.

1. Look for Talent Everywhere
Talent Magnets are always looking for new talent, and they look far beyond their
own backyard. Multipliers cast a wide net and find talent in many settings and
diverse forms, knowing that intelligence has many facets.
Appreciate All Types of Genius
In 1904, a test of intelligence that later evolved into the IQ test was developed
by French researcher Alfred Binet as a tool for assessing the learning progress of
French schoolchildren. His assumption was that lower intelligence signaled, not
an inability to learn, but a need for more and different teaching.2 This tool
quickly became ubiquitous as a unilateral determinant of intellectual
horsepower. Much work has been done over the last two decades by cognitive
psychologists around the world, offering additional methods for identifying and
developing intelligence. Whether it is Harvard professor Howard Gardner’s
theory of multiple intelligences, Daniel Goleman’s work on emotional
intelligence, or Stanford professor Carol Dweck’s work on the effect of mindsets

on capability, the message is clear: IQ is a practical but limited measure of the
true intelligence of our species. We are simply smarter in more ways than can be
measured through an IQ test.
A Talent Magnet knows that genius comes in many forms. Some minds excel
at quantitative analysis or verbal reasoning—capabilities measured through IQ,
SAT, and other tests of traditional cognitive intelligence. Other minds offer
creative genius, innovating through fresh thinking and bold ideas. Some minds
are critical, spotting every problem or landmine lurking within a plan; the genius
of some others is to find a way to tunnel around these landmines. For example, a
successful CEO turned venture capitalist in Tokyo has a rule he applies when
listening to a start-up company’s management team pitch seeking funding: if all
three are engineers, he doesn’t entertain the business plan. He looks for
diversity, knowing it takes a mix of types of intelligence to start any business,
even a technical one.
Bill Campbell, the former CEO of Intuit who passed away in 2016, was one
such leader who appreciated the diversity of talent requisite to build a successful
company. This economics major and football coach at Columbia University was
renowned for his ability to lead and guide Silicon Valley’s elite technologists.
Bill reflected, “Their minds can do something that mine can’t. They have a
genius that I don’t.” He communicated this respect for the intelligence of others
through his actions. He readily admitted that he didn’t think like they did and
that he appreciated what they brought to the table. He listened intently to the
ideas and advice of those who offered this perspective he didn’t have. And he
asked people to teach him what he didn’t know. This rich appreciation for the
genius of others is how this former football coach became a personal adviser to
CEOs at Apple, Google, and many more.
Ignore Boundaries
In their quest to assemble the finest talent, Talent Magnets are blind to
organizational boundaries. They see multiple forms of intelligence everywhere.
Talent Magnets live in a world without walls and without hierarchical or lateral
restrictions. Instead, they see talent networks.
You can often spot Talent Magnets inside organizations because they are the
ones who ignore org charts. Such charts are handy for finding out who works for

whom and who’s in charge if something goes wrong, but these issues are of
relative unimportance when you are searching for genius. As far as Talent
Magnets are concerned, org charts are irrelevant. Why? Because everyone works
for them—or at least every person whose genius they can uncover. The mind of
the Multiplier works like this: If I can find someone’s genius, I can put them to
work.
The idea is simple. Multipliers understand that people love to contribute their
genius. If they put in the effort to figure out someone’s genius, they have opened
a pathway for that person to contribute. They can utilize them. Multipliers aren’t
deterred if someone doesn’t officially report to them on an org chart. These
leaders see an unlimited talent pool that they can draw from. Everyone works for
a Multiplier.
For this reason, Multipliers leading cross-functional projects and
intercompany ventures may be in key staff roles, or they may be at the top of the
org chart. The common denominator is that they look beyond boundaries for
talent. A CEO of a high-tech company in Beijing was on the constant prowl for
the best talent from universities and the competition. At the end of the working
day, he would sit outside a competitor’s office in his Uber-registered car and
wait to pick up employees. Once in the car together, he would strike up a
conversation with them, deliberately hunting for genius. While lurking outside a
competitor’s office into the dark hours of the night might be extreme, it’s a great
example of the way Talent Magnets look for talent everywhere and then study
that talent to uncover and unlock the real genius that lies within.

2. Find People’s Native Genius
As the head of a global function inside a multinational corporation, I spent a lot
of time in cross-functional meetings and on task forces. It was almost inevitable
that at some point in these meetings, when things would become murky,
someone would hand me the whiteboard pen, point to the front of the room, and
say, “Liz, lead us through this.” I’d readily jump in and do my thing, and at some
point hand back the pen. After a while, I started to wonder why I almost never
got to be a regular meeting attendee and sit in the back of the room and check
email. I thought, Why do I always get asked to lead these difficult meetings? Why
am I always getting put in charge when it isn’t even my job?

After seeing this pattern repeated over many years at work and in other group
settings, I realized that I wasn’t being asked to be in charge per se—it was a very
particular type of “in charge.” I would find myself in charge when a group
needed more of a facilitative leader and less of a boss. I vividly remember one of
my colleagues trying to explain to me why I was always being asked to lead
these types of meetings. Ben explained, “It is because you can so easily frame
the issue, synthesize what people are saying, and lay out a course of action.”
What? I stared at him blankly, trying to decipher what he was saying. It sounded
like he was telling me that I was good at breathing. It didn’t strike me as a
particularly big deal or something someone might find difficult. It was as easy as
breathing, at least for me. What my colleagues were teaching me was that I have
a native ability—something that I do both easily and freely.
Look for What Is Native
Talent Magnets know how to uncover and access the native genius of others.
By “native genius” I mean something even more specific than a strength or a
skill that might be highly rated on a 360-degree leadership assessment. A native
genius or talent is something that people do, not only exceptionally well, but
absolutely naturally. They do it easily (without extra effort) and freely (without
condition).
What people do easily, they do without conscious effort. They do it better than
anything else they do, but they don’t need to apply extraordinary effort to the
task. They get results that are head-and shoulders above others, but they do it
without breaking a sweat.
What people do freely, they do without condition. They don’t need to be paid
or rewarded to do it and often don’t need to be asked. It is something that gives
them inherent satisfaction, and they offer their capability voluntarily, even
ardently. It is effortless, and they stand ready and willing to contribute, whether
it is a formal job requirement or not.
Finding someone’s native genius is a key that unlocks discretionary effort. It
propels people to go beyond what is required and to offer their full intelligence.
Finding people’s genius begins by carefully observing them in action, looking
for spikes of authentic enthusiasm and a natural flow of energy. As you watch
someone in action, ask these questions:

What do they do better than anything else they do?
What do they do better than the people around them?
What do they do without effort?
What do they do without being asked?
What do they do readily without being paid?
Label It
Native genius can be so instinctive for people that they may not even
understand their own capability. Perhaps you’ve heard the phrase “fish discover
water last.” But if people aren’t aware of their genius, they are not in a position
to deliberately utilize it. By telling people what you see, you can raise their
awareness and confidence, allowing them to provide their capability more fully.
Players for Larry Gelwix, the now retired head coach of the almost unbeatable
Highland High School rugby team, often report that he got more out of them
than other coaches. Before working with Larry, John saw himself as a good
athlete but not a great one. But Larry pointed out something that changed his
view of himself. John recalled, “Larry commented publicly about my speed.”
John was surprised when the coach started talking in front of the other guys
about how fast he was. He continued, “I thought I had good speed, but not great
speed. But because Larry singled it out, it inspired me to develop a distinct selfconcept: I was fast. And every time I found myself in a situation where speed
was required, I remembered this, and I pushed myself beyond my limits.” John
not only became fast, he became really fast.
By labeling his genius for him, Larry unlocked this ability for John. Like
John, people’s first reaction to hearing someone describe a genius of theirs can
often be bemusement. You know you’ve hit a genius nerve when they say,
“Really? Can’t everyone do this?” or “But this is no big deal!” Finding people’s
native genius and then labeling it is a direct approach to drawing more
intelligence from them.

3. Utilize People at Their Fullest
Once a Talent Magnet has uncovered the native genius of others, he or she looks
for opportunities that demand that capability. Some of these are obvious; others

require a fresh look at the business or the organization. Once they’ve engaged
the person’s true genius, they shine a spotlight on them so other people can see
their genius in action.
Connect People with Opportunities
Courtney Cadwell was a seventh-grade math teacher in her first year of
teaching at Egan Junior High School in the Los Altos School District. She had a
deep and true love of math and science, as well as a penchant for innovation and
a drive to experiment with new ideas. What would a typical administrator do
with Courtney? Make sure she was happy? Move her to a higher grade level or
give her the honors classes? Such actions would surely signal her value to the
school and energize her as a teacher.
Courtney’s appetite for classroom experimentation and innovation caught the
attention of her principal, who had been asked to recommend a teacher to pilot a
blended learning solution that would integrate the Khan Academy. You see, the
district had established a bold vision to revolutionize learning for all students,
and Assistant Superintendent Alyssa Gallagher was assembling a pilot team.
These four teachers, each passionate about rethinking math instruction,
jumped in. As they developed new approaches to deeply integrate technology
and online learning into their curriculum, they encountered many obstacles and
some messy gray areas. Courtney stepped in, asking questions, exploring
options, and helping others make sense of the complexity. Alyssa noticed how
these messy areas seem to bring out Courtney’s natural leadership. But why?
Alyssa watched her closely, noting that Courtney had a genius for navigating
complexity. Somehow, the grayer the issues, the better Courtney was.
After completing a wildly successful pilot, Alyssa wrangled the funding to
take the new blended learning instructional strategies to the next level and spread
these practices across all upper-grade math classes involving over fifty teachers.
She tapped Courtney to be the district math coach, spending half of her time in
her own classroom and the other half guiding the other teachers’ ability to
implement technology in their classrooms. When these teachers encountered
obstacles, Courtney helped them navigate as well. When a teacher couldn’t see
how to do it without a computer for each student, Courtney asked what could be
done with just five computers. Soon they found a way to rotate students. With

Courtney’s coaching, teachers turned their questions into next steps until the new
blended learning strategies were evident in classrooms across the entire district.
By year three, the passion to innovate had become infectious across the
school. The parent community took notice and eagerly supplied additional
funding for three full-time coaching roles that included a technology integration
coach, an innovative strategies coach, and a STEM (science, technology,
engineering, math) coach. With Courtney serving as the full-time STEM coach,
she was now able to influence all teachers in rethinking instructional practices
not only in math but also in science. There was so much interest in the
innovation this team was driving, Alyssa organized open-house events for other
school leaders to come and learn how they could create blended learning
environments and revolutionize learning for their students. And when they came,
they had Courtney there helping them navigate the gray areas.
When leaders connect people’s natural passions and native genius to big
opportunities, those people are used at their highest point of contribution. For
Alyssa, this wasn’t a lucky discovery; it was a deliberate management approach.
She studied Courtney, as well as each of the other team members, noticing what
each of them did naturally and freely. She then put them to work at their fullest,
tackling the district’s aspiration to revolutionize learning for all students.
Are there people on your team who could lead a revolution if they were
unleashed on the right opportunity? Are there people on your team who aren’t
being used at their highest?
Shine a Spotlight
Each summer in the Sierra Mountains of California, roughly seventy-five
teenage girls eagerly gather for an annual girls’ camp—a week of fun, adventure,
and camaraderie that often serves as a watershed event in their young lives. The
camp is run entirely on the volunteer efforts of sixty leaders. For the last six
years, Marguerite Hancock has served (also as a volunteer) as the camp director
at the helm of this incredible group of youth and leaders.
Marguerite is the executive director at the Computer History Museum and was
previously a Stanford University research director. She is smart, accomplished,
and extraordinarily capable, a strong leader with strong ideas of her own. One of
her assistant directors said, “Marguerite is so capable, she could do virtually any

aspect of girls’ camp herself.” But what is interesting about Marguerite isn’t that
she could—it is that she doesn’t. Instead, she leads like a Multiplier, calling forth
brilliance and dedication among the other fifty-nine leaders who make this camp
a reality.
Marguerite begins by building a “dream team” carefully recruited for each
person’s individual genius. One of the assistant directors told us, “Marguerite
studies people. She watches them until she figures out what they are great at. She
chose her assistant directors not only for their strengths but because we each had
strengths in areas where she was weak.” She then finds a place where each
person’s genius will shine. For some, it is working with the girls one-on-one; for
another, it is managing the sports program; for another it is leading the nightly
campfire. But each role is carefully cast to draw upon the unique talents of every
person on the team.
Marguerite then makes it clear to each person why she has been selected for
that role. She not only notices their talent; she labels it for them. One camp
leader said, “She tells me the talent she sees in me and why it matters. She tells
me why girls’ camp will be better because of me and my work.” But Marguerite
doesn’t stop there. She lets everyone else know, too. It is typical for her to
introduce someone to the group by saying, “This is Jennifer. She’s a creative
genius, and we are so fortunate to have her leading our art program.”
With her talented cast assembled, Marguerite then goes to the back of the
room, takes control of the spotlight, and begins shining it on others. She is
effusive with praise, but it is never empty. Her praise of others’ work is specific,
and it is public. The other leaders at camp can see the direct link between their
work and the success of the camp. A camp leader said, “She not only tells you
that you are doing a great job, but she tells you why it matters to these girls. I
know my work is appreciated.”
Marguerite finds other people’s genius and then shines a spotlight on it for
everyone to see their talent in action. What is the result? A character-building,
life-changing experience for seventy-five young women, and also a deeply
rewarding, growing experience for the fifty-nine leaders who serve alongside
Marguerite.

4. Remove the Blockers

Talent Magnets are attracters and growers of talent and intelligence, and leaders
who serve as Multipliers provide both the space and the resources to yield this
growth. But Talent Magnets go beyond just giving people resources. They
remove impediments, which quite often means removing people who are
blocking and impeding the growth of others. In almost every organization there
are people who overrun others, consuming the resources needed to fuel the
growth of people around them. Like weeds in a garden bed, they choke the
development of the intelligence around them.
Get Rid of Prima Donnas
Bloom Energy, located in the heart of Silicon Valley, had developed a fuel
cell system that produces clean, reliable, and affordable energy. As venture
capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers’s first green-tech venture, Bloom
Energy has become a leader in their industry. Leading Bloom Energy is K. R.
Sridhar, renowned aerospace and environmental scientist and an energy thought
leader.
When Sridhar started Bloom Energy, he began with what he calls “gene pool
engineering.” K. R. explains, “A players attract other A players. Their smarts and
passion make other smart, passionate people want to work here. So your first
fifty employees are the most important, and hardest.” When Bloom Energy
needed to hire their first fifty employees, there was no established green-tech
industry at the time. So K. R. broke down each technology they would require to
build their energy generators and identified the leading company in this
technology. He then researched and found the person inside each company that
the company would least want to lose. He reached out to these people, explained
the bold challenge Bloom Energy was undertaking, and recruited them to join
the company. In this way he engineered a “gene pool” of elite technical talent
who were the best in their respective fields. He established one rule: No prima
donnas—leave your ego at the door and work as a team. He now had the talent
he needed, and the work of building a team that would deliver an integrated
energy technology began.
Within this elite team, one technologist was particularly indispensable. Stefan,
an outstanding scientist, was the world expert in the technology that was the
lynchpin in their solution. As the team worked, it became clear that Stefan

couldn’t collaborate and had become entrenched in his position about the
technical direction the company should pursue. Tensions mounted in the team
because the company had just committed to an important beta release in eighteen
months. K. R. pulled Stefan into his office and explained the situation, but
Stefan wouldn’t back down. Knowing how essential he was to the technical
viability of the venture, he made it clear to K. R.: it was either him or the team.
K. R. explained the options, but Stefan’s ego wouldn’t allow him to let go of the
issue.
K. R. contemplated the issue and the risks involved. Within the hour, he had
made his decision. He chose the team. He walked Stefan to the door, then
walked over to the rest of the team and explained his actions. “I have put us at
significant risk, but I know we have it in us to overcome this. I trust that we will
get through this, but there will be significant delays,” he explained. Initially the
group was silent, stunned that K. R. was willing to let go of their top
technologist. One team member broke the silence and said, “There will be no
delays. We will do things we have never done before to get this done.” With
renewed energy, the team worked weekends and extraordinary hours. They
brought in consultants with the critical expertise they lacked. They kept up the
pace for eighteen months while people grew to fill in the gap that was created by
Stefan’s departure. They delivered the product successfully, missing their
original deadline by only two days!
This incident became the foundation for how the company would operate: the
best talent in the industry, but not a single prima donna. K. R. Sridhar
accelerated the development of the intellectual assets of this company by getting
rid of the prima donna who was impeding the intelligence of the whole
organization. Today, Bloom Energy is thriving and is often cited as the reason
Kleiner Perkins continues to expand their green-tech portfolio.
Individual genius can be deceptive. At first look, it would appear costly to
remove one supersmart player, even if she has a diminishing effect on a team.
But one needs only to do the math to see the high cost of destructive genius. Our
research consistently confirmed that Diminishers cause people to operate at
about 50 percent of their full intelligence and capability. Removing a highly
intelligent employee or leader can be difficult, but it can have huge payoffs. On a
work team of eleven people, removing a Diminisher can give back the

equivalent of five full-time people, with ten people operating at 100 percent.
You may lose one mind, but you gain back five. It is a law of numbers.
Leaders most often know who the blockers are. The most common mistake
they make is waiting too long to remove them. Is it possible that your smartest
people are impeding the smarts of your organization? And is it possible you are
waiting too long to remove the blockers? If you want to unleash the talent that is
latent in your organization, find the weeds and pull them out. Don’t do it quietly.
Like K. R. Sridhar, huddle the team immediately, and let them know that you’ve
removed someone because he or she was holding back the team. Give people
permission to think fully again.
Get Out of the Way
Sometimes a Talent Magnet removes the prima donna who is blocking the
intelligence of others. But sometimes the blocker is the leader him-or herself.
The late management guru C. K. Prahalad (who passed away in April 2010) was
one of my mentors. He once shared with me an old saying in India: “Nothing
grows under a banyan tree.” It provides shade and is comfortable, but it allows
no sun in for growth. Many leaders are banyan trees; they protect their people,
but nothing grows under them.
One corporate VP had a favorite saying, quoted often and written on her door:
“Ignore me as needed to get your job done.” This simple mantra signaled an
important trust in the judgment and capability of others. Her people knew that
exercising their judgment and getting the job done rapidly was more important
than placating the boss. She told new staff members, “Yes, there will be a few
times when I get agitated because I would have done it differently, but I’ll get
over it. I’d rather you trust your judgment, keep moving, and get the job done.”
Talent Magnets remove the barriers that block the growth of intelligence in
their people.
The world of the Talent Magnet is dynamic. Talent is drawn in by the strong
gravitational pull of the Talent Magnet. It is then fully utilized, stretched, made
continually ready for new challenges. Life with an Empire Builder doesn’t offer
the same thrill ride. It is a world of politics, ownership, and limitations.

The Diminisher’s Approach to Managing
Talent

Talent
Multipliers operate from a belief that talent exists everywhere and they can use it
at its highest if they can simply identify the genius in people. Diminishers think
People need to report to me in order to get them to do anything. One such senior
director said the only thing that was wrong with the underperforming IT division
was that it reported to someone else. He saw owning the resources himself as the
primary solution. Diminishers are owners of talent, not developers of talent.
Because they don’t actively develop talent, people in their organizations
languish and can actually regress.
Here are the ways Diminishers see the world and operate, and a glimpse at
how these behaviors affect people and organizations:
Empire Builders focus their energy on acquiring
resources and slotting them into organizational structures where they are visible
and clearly under the command of the leader. For some leaders, this amassing of
talent can become an obsession.
Recall Jasper Wallis, the high-cost Diminisher from the first chapter, who was
obsessed with the size of his organization relative to those of his peers on the
executive team. After years of building his organization with his right hand
while masking with his left hand the underlying problems, Jasper succeeded in
building an empire complete with a separate office tower, customer visit center,
and training campus just for his division. However, his organization had become
gangly after such rapid, unrestrained growth and had acquired new problems in
integration and coordination. The hole became deeper and deeper until the
division was radically scaled back and folded into another group. Like imperial
Rome, the empire eventually overextended itself and collapsed under its own
weight.
ACQUIRING RESOURCES.

PUTTING PEOPLE IN BOXES. Divide and conquer is the modus operandi of Empire

Builders. They bring in great talent and carve out a fiefdom for them, but they
don’t encourage people to step beyond these walls. Rather than give broad scope
to their management team, Empire Builders ensure that they, themselves, are the
point of integration. You can often spot an Empire Builder because he or she
either operates exclusively through one-on-one meetings or runs staff meetings

as an official report-out from each fiefdom.
One manager was known for making key decisions one-on-one rather than
with his team. This fostered a covert and high-stakes game among his
lieutenants. Each of them would vie for the coveted one-on-one meeting time—
the last meeting on a Friday afternoon. Why? Because everyone knew that he
made his decisions by himself over the weekend and announced them in his staff
meeting on Monday. People quickly learned that the person who got his ear last
on Friday afternoon would have the most influence. His divide-and-conquer
approach not only kept people in narrowly defined roles, it was a dangerous and
costly way to make decisions.
LETTING TALENT LANGUISH. One way Empire Builders stifle their talent is by

hogging the limelight for themselves. They are often prima donnas, insisting that
they get maximum time onstage and that scripts are written to feature them.
Whereas Talent Magnets give credit, Empire Builders take credit.
Hogging the limelight is an active way Empire Builders hold others back, but
the more insidious problem is actually what they don’t do—these managers
actively acquire talent, but then are passive about growing it. They are, for the
most part, oblivious to the development of others. In fact, in our quantitative
research, we found that “developing the talent of the team” was among the
lowest three skills of the Diminisher.
They also stifle talent by not clearing away the dead wood. One Diminisher
we studied was notorious for draining his organization through his inaction.
People said, “He and his management team never made decisions. They didn’t
make waves, they just kept analyzing.” Instead of firing toxic or ineffective
leaders, he would slowly disable them. One observer noted, “It was torture to
watch one of his staff get cut off. It was like a child pulling off the legs of a
spider one by one and then watching it hobble away.”
When leaders play the role of the Empire Builder, they bring in great
resources, but they underutilize them because they fundamentally undervalue
them. They continue to operate in a “one brain, many hands” organizational
model that stunts the growth of both intelligence and talent around them.
Diminishers build organizations where people go to die. This is why Diminishers
are costly to organizations. The assets in their portfolio don’t increase in value.

Becoming a Talent Magnet
The promise of a Multiplier is that they get twice the capacity, plus a growth
dividend from their people as their genius expands under the leadership of the
Multiplier. Let’s now look at a few starting points for becoming a Talent
Magnet.
How do you create this cycle of growth and acceleration inside your
organization? You can kick-start the cycle by learning to be a genius watcher
and spotting the native genius of everyone around you. Imagine, if you will, a
corporate manager “genius watching,” observing each member of her team and
noticing what they do naturally and freely. Instead of taking inventory of who
has done their job, she asks, “How can I use their natural genius to get our most
important jobs done?” Or, consider a new high school principal who, having
practiced genius watching on his own team for two weeks, now finds himself
spotting genius everywhere. While attending a mandatory school district
meeting, he notices Ellen, a curriculum coach from a rival high school, who
points out a myriad of pitfalls that the schools might encounter in adopting a new
program. Her knack for bringing potential problems to the surface had seemed
annoying in previous meetings, but now it appears useful. He wonders who on
his team has the “pitfall finder” genius and how he can use it.
If you want to get better at seeing, naming, and using the genius of everyone
around you, try the following three experiments—each is a critical skill for the
would-be Talent Magnet. Appendix E has full worksheets for conducting many
of the Multiplier Experiments referenced throughout the book.
1. NAME THE GENIUS—Kick-start this cycle by tapping into someone’s native

genius and unlocking hidden reserves of discretionary effort. You can
start by finding the native genius (that which they do easily and freely)
of each individual on your team. Or, you might be selective and focus on
an individual you are struggling to work with or trying to understand
how to utilize. Perhaps you’ve been wishing you could remove this
person from the team. Instead of asking, “Is this person smart?” try
asking, “In what way is this person smart?” You might discover
something that breaks the cycle of assumptions. Once you have some

practice identifying native genius (in both yourself and others), you can
conduct this exercise as an entire management team so that each team
member understands the native genius of each person on the team.
2. SUPERSIZE IT—Try sizing someone’s job the way you shop for shoes for a
young child. How does the wise parent decide what size to buy? They
start by measuring the child’s foot, and then they buy a pair that’s a size
too big. And how does the parent respond when their child tries on those
shoes, awkwardly parading down the store aisle, complaining that the
shoes feel weird and too big and that their feet are flopping around in
them? The parent reassures them, “Don’t worry, you’ll grow into them.”
Try supersizing someone’s job. Assess their current capabilities and
then give them a challenge that is a size too big. Give an individual
contributor a leadership role; give a first-line manager more decisionmaking power. If they seem startled, acknowledge that the role or
responsibility might feel awkward at first. Then step back and watch them
grow into it.
3. LET GO OF A SUPERSTAR—Perhaps the only thing harder than watching an
A+ player leave your team is knowing that you were the one who
encouraged them to move on. While most managers try to retain their
top players, the best leaders know when it’s time to let them go. They
recognize when a superstar has outgrown his or her environment. Like
parents watching their child head off to college, they are full of mixed
feelings, but they are clear that the young person needs a bigger stretch
and new test. Is there someone on your team who needs a bigger
challenge but won’t continue to grow unless you let them go?

Up and to the Right
Sue Siegel, former president of Affymetrix and an extraordinary Multiplier,
reflected on her pillar experiences as a leader. She said, “My best moments were
when team members would call me after accomplishing some tough goal or
overcoming a huge hurdle. They were usually tired, but they were brimming
with enthusiasm, having grown through the challenge. These moments were
exhilarating for them and me.” The people who worked for Sue indeed describe

the time as a highlight of their career.
Talent Magnets encourage people to grow and leave. They write letters of
recommendation and they help people find their next stage to perform on. And
when people leave their group, they celebrate their departures and shout their
success to everyone. You see, these celebrations become their best recruiting
tool.
Jack and Suzy Welch wrote, “The best thing about being a preferred employer
is that it gets you good people, and this launches a virtuous cycle. The best team
attracts the best team, and winning often leads to more winning. That’s a ride
that you and your employees will never want to get off.”4 Talent Magnets create
a cycle of attraction that is exhilarating for employer and employee alike. Their
organizations are coveted places of employment, and people flock to work for
them knowing the Talent Magnet will stretch them, grow them, and accelerate
their careers. It is a thrill ride with the speed and exhilaration of a roller coaster
but one that, like the revenue chart of every CFO’s dreams, moves constantly
“up and to the right.”

Chapter Two Summary

The Empire Builder Versus the Talent Magnet
EMPIRE BUILDERS bring in great talent, but they
underutilize it because they hoard resources and use
them only for their own gain.
TALENT MAGNETS get access to the best talent because people flock to work for

them, knowing they will be fully utilized and developed to be ready for the next
stage.
The Four Practices of the Talent Magnet 1. Look for Talent Everywhere
• Appreciate all types of genius • Ignore boundaries
2. Find People’s Native Genius • Look for what is native • Label it
3. Utilize People to Their Fullest • Connect people with opportunities
• Shine a spotlight
4. Remove the Blockers • Get rid of prima donnas • Get out of the way
Becoming a Talent Magnet 1. Name the genius
2. Supersize it
3. Let go of a superstar Leveraging Resources

Unexpected Findings 1. Both Talent Magnets and Empire Builders attract top
talent. What differentiates them is what they do with the talent once it’s in the
door.
2. Talent Magnets don’t run out of talent by moving their people on to bigger,
better opportunities, because there is a steady stream of talent wanting to
get into their organization.

THREE

The Liberator

The only freedom that is of enduring importance is the freedom of
intelligence, that is to say, freedom of observation and of judgment.

JOHN DEWEY

Michael Chang1 began his career in a small consulting company. As a young
manager, he was forceful with his opinions and veered toward brutal honesty.
Over time, he saw its damaging effects and reflected, “It certainly doesn’t get
people to blossom.”
Michael began to realize that when you become the leader, the center of
gravity is no longer yourself. He had a mentor who taught him that the leader’s
job is to put other people onstage. As he began to shift his focus to others, he
became less controlling and learned to give people space. Where he used to jump
in and do it for them, he learned to hold back. He found that not only do other
people step up, they often surprise you by producing something better than you
would have. As he has grown as a leader, he’s learned to be direct without being
destructive. He’s learned how to create an environment where he could tell the
truth and have others grow from it.
Today, this manager is the CEO of a thriving start-up company. He has
developed several practices that give space for others to do their best work. He
makes a conscious effort to create a learning environment by recruiting people
with a strong learning orientation and by admitting his own mistakes often. This
gives others permission to make and recover from their own mistakes. When
offering his opinion, he distinguishes “hard opinions” from “soft opinions.” Soft
opinions signal to his team: Here are some ideas for you to consider in your own
thinking. Hard opinions are reserved for times when he holds a very strong view.
Here’s a leader who began his career headed down the path of a management
tyrant but became a Multiplier and Liberator himself. The accomplishment is
significant when you consider that the path of least resistance for most smart,
driven leaders is to become a Tyrant. Even Michael said, “It’s not like it isn’t
temping to be tyrannical when you can.”
Let’s face it. Corporate environments and modern organizations are the
perfect setup for diminishing leadership and have a certain built-in tyranny. The
org charts, the hierarchy, the titles, the approval matrixes skew power toward the
top and create incentives for people to shut down and comply. In any

hierarchical organization, the playing field is rarely level. The senior leaders
stand on the high side of the field and ideas and policies roll easily down to the
lower side. Policies—established to create order—often unintentionally keep
people from thinking. At best, these policies limit intellectual range of motion as
they straitjacket the thinking of the followers. At worst, these systems shut down
thinking entirely.
These hierarchical structures make it easy for Tyrants to reign. And in their
reign, these managers can easily suppress and constrain the thinking of the
people around them.
Consider the fate of Kate, a corporate manager who began her career as an
intelligent, driven, and creative collaborator. She was promoted into
management and moved quickly from frontline manager to vice president and is
now running a large organization. She still sees herself as an open-minded,
creative thought leader. But in a recent 360-degree feedback report, she was
shocked to find that her people don’t seem to agree. As she read the report, she
could see that her strong ideas were hampering the creativity and capability of
her people. And her drive for results was making it difficult for people to be
truthful and take risks. One of the comments read, “It is just easier to hold back
and let Kate do the thinking.” Kate was stunned.
Every step she had taken up the corporate ladder made it that much easier for
her to unintentionally kill other people’s ideas. The nature of the hierarchy had
skewed power, making every conversation Kate had with a subordinate
inherently unequal because the playing field was tilted in her favor. An off-thecuff remark could be translated as a strong opinion and turned into policy for her
division. If she rolled her eyes or sighed sharply after someone’s comment,
everyone in the room noticed and avoided saying anything they thought would
produce the same reaction. She had more power than she had realized. She had
become an Accidental Diminisher.
I suspect I saw too many military movies in college, because they all started to
look alike. Inevitably there would be a scene where an army private who was
privy to some debacle would stand at attention and nervously appeal to the
commanding officer, “Permission to speak freely, sir?” I could never understand
this strange custom and why someone would need permission to speak freely.
After all, I was in college, where thinking and speaking freely were the norm.

However, after several years in the workplace, I clearly understood. Formal
hierarchies suppress the voices, and often ideas, of those at the bottom.
Multipliers, by contrast, liberate people from the oppressive forces within
corporate hierarchy. They free people to think, to speak, and to act with reason.
They create an environment where the best ideas surface and where people do
their best work. They give people permission to think.

The Tyrant Versus the Liberator
Multipliers create an intense environment in which superior thinking and work
can flourish. Tyrants create a tense environment that suppresses people’s
thinking and capability.

A Tense Leader
Jenna Healy was an SVP of field operations for a large telecommunications
company. Even at five feet, three inches, she had a way of towering over the
people who worked for her. Jenna was a serious leader and a smart manager with
strong experience, but she was an absolute Tyrant.
Her colleagues told us, “She created an environment of hysteria. She created
fear all around her and intimidated and bullied people until she got what she
wanted. Her primary approach to leadership was ‘What more can you do for
me?’ ” When one of her managers said, “She’s a bit like the ruthless Miranda
Priestly in The Devil Wears Prada,” I got the picture immediately.
Not only was Jenna a bully, but she struck at random. It was hard to predict
what would set her off or who would be the next victim. One person recalled,
“You felt like you could be the next guy. I was stressed, on the edge, and at risk
around her.” Her colleagues joked, “There needs to be a storm warning system
for Jenna. People need to know when it is time to duck and cover.”
Jenna’s quarterly management meeting in Denver was one such time. Jenna
had gathered a cross-functional team to review the state of the business in the US
market. It was a typical business review with each function, in turn, presenting
its “state of the business.” After several presentations, Daniel, the manager of the
information technology team, began his presentation by showing the managers
the data for how their field service staff was utilizing the IT tools that his team
had built for them. He then inquired, “In light of these numbers, I wonder if the
service teams are taking advantage of the tools that already exist?” Based on
Jenna’s reaction, you would have thought he had just told her that her team was
stupid and lazy. She snapped, “You have no idea what you are talking about,”
and then berated him in front of the group. The argument got heated and lasted
for an uncomfortable ten minutes. When somebody finally signaled that the
group was overdue for a break, there was a rapid dash for the door, but Daniel
stayed, in an attempt to hold his ground against Jenna. With everyone out in the
hall, the argument escalated irrationally and turned to shouting.
While things were heated in the conference room, outside in the hall, there
was a distinct chill in the air. Everyone in the hall was quietly cheering Daniel
for standing up to the bully, but those who were next up to present were frozen

with fear, and you could feel the tension. The fortunate ones who had already
given their presentations wished luck to their ill-fated colleagues. These
remaining presenters began scrambling to adjust their presentations, taking out
anything controversial that might incite the already irascible leader. The
presenters watered down their presentations, and they got through the meeting,
but nothing much was really said and nothing much was accomplished.
Jenna’s organization made modest progress but continually failed to hit its
revenue and service quality targets. Eventually, when she went too far and
bullied one of their partners, she was exited instantly from the organization.
Jenna went to another company as COO. She lasted two weeks before being
demoted. Six months later she was asked to leave.
People hold back around leaders like Jenna. Such Tyrants shut down the flow
of intelligence and rarely access people’s best work. Everywhere they go, they
find people doing less than they really can. It is no wonder they resort to
intimidation, thinking it will get them what they no doubt want—great thinking
and great work. But intimidation and fear rarely produce truly great work.
Let’s look at another senior sales and services leader.

An Intense Leader
Robert Enslin is the president of Global Customer Operations for SAP AG, the
global software giant. Originally from South Africa, he speaks with a calm
confidence. Robert is highly respected with a reputation as a fair, consistent sales
leader who grows organizations and delivers results.
Robert operates as a peer to everyone he works with and is accessible to all.
One of his managers said of him, “He is very good at disarming you. He is a
commoner—one of us. Even if you work three levels below him, he still wants
to know what you think.” As a result, people are more transparent around him.
They don’t feel like they have to tell him what he wants to hear. This
approachability creates safety for the people around Robert. And that safety is
what allows him to run a massive sales organization with no surprises.
Several years ago, Robert was asked to take over the Japanese subsidiary for
SAP to address some very specific sales performance issues. When he met with
his new leadership team in Japan for the first forecast meeting, he could see the
forecasting process was in complete disarray. Instead of playing the
authoritarian, judging their failure, and dictating his solution, Robert restrained
himself and started a learning process. He helped them realize the limitations of
the current process and the advantages of a new approach. He then drew on their
knowledge of the Japanese business and asked them, “How can we take this to
the next level?” He created space for the team to try new approaches and fix the
problem themselves. He stayed with them on the issue for months until they
could run a forecast process that delivered solid, predictable results for the
business.
Robert was known for his collegial approach and his calm consistency, but
this was tested when he took over the North American business in 2008, just as
the global economy was melting down. As spending was locking up and large
capital purchases were being put on hold, executives everywhere were beginning
to panic. You could feel the tension as you walked through the halls of SAP’s
Newtown Square office near Philadelphia. There was even more tension, one
step past the glass door as you entered the executive conference room.
Inside another conference room, Robert and his new management team were
assembled to plan their sales strategy in this new economic environment. Every

person on his team knew that Robert had been meeting with the senior
executives and was under a lot of pressure. They came to the meeting prepared
to feel their share of the pain—after all, this was a sales organization. But Robert
was calm and constant, even amid this chaos. His team began to wonder if he
hadn’t been reading the news or had skipped the executive meetings. He opened
the meeting by acknowledging the severity of the economic issues, but suggested
they put them aside. He kept the team focused on the issues within their control.
He then asked, “What can we do to differentiate ourselves right now?” Safe
within their sphere of expertise and control, the group worked to identify the
value proposition that would help them position their solutions in the turbulent
climate. After the discussion, he asked, “How can we help people consume our
products so they get the most economic value?” Again, the group could wrestle
this question down and put together a plan.
His team said, “We know he must have been getting pressure from up higher,
but he didn’t create anxiety for us. He remained calm and just never wigged out.
He doesn’t create whiplash for his people.” Another SAP executive said,
“During a crisis, he asks even more questions—the same type of questions that
force you to really think through a situation—just more of them. You feel his
stealthy hand guiding decisions.”
Robert’s calmness is not synonymous with softness. He is as intense and
focused as any other successful sales executive. The difference is where his
focus lies. His fellow executive continued, “He’s hard on the issues but easy on
people. You believe that he has your back so when you inevitably make a
mistake, he’ll help you fix it first and not lash out at you. There’s an aura that
we’re in this together, which means the stress is distributed among the larger
group so one person doesn’t disproportionally feel it.” A member of his
leadership team said, “With Robert, it isn’t about him. He makes it about you
and about getting the best work from you.”
Robert’s steady hand and open environment provide sanity and stability to an
organization that could have easily spun into crisis.

Tense Versus Intense
Tyrants create a tense environment that is full of stress and anxiety. Liberators
like Robert, on the other hand, create an intense environment that requires
concentration, diligence, and energy. It is an environment where people are
encouraged to think for themselves and also where people experience a deep
obligation to do their best work.
Diminishers create a stress-filled environment because they don’t give people
control over their own performance. They operate as Tyrants, overexerting their
will on the organization and causing others to shrink, retreat, and hold back. In
the presence of a Tyrant, people try not to stand out. Just consider how people
operate under the rule of a political dictator. Tyrants get diminished thinking
from others because people only offer the safest of ideas and mediocre work.
While a Tyrant creates stress that causes people to hold back, a Liberator
creates space for people to step up. While a Tyrant swings between positions that
create whiplash in the organization, a Liberator builds stability that generates
forward momentum.

The Liberator
The Liberator creates an environment where good things happen. They create the
conditions where intelligence is engaged, grown, and transformed into concrete
successes. What are the conditions for this cycle of learning and success? They
might include:
Ideas are generated with ease.
People learn rapidly and adapt to new environments.
People work collaboratively.
Complex problems get solved.
Difficult tasks get accomplished.
Let’s examine three Liberators from very different industries who created
these conditions and freed their organizations to think and to perform.

Liberator No. 1: Equity in the Firm
Ernest Bachrach from Argentina is the director and special partner for Advent
International, a global private equity firm. With twenty-seven years of
experience in international private equity and an MBA from Harvard University,
Ernest is clearly an expert. But the source of his genius is the environment he
creates to unleash the genius of his organization.
One of his analysts described his approach: “Ernest makes a conscious effort
to create an environment. He creates forums for people to voice their ideas. But
he holds a very high bar for what you must do before you voice an opinion. You
need to have the data. He has a problem with opinions without data.”
Ernest builds a learning machine in his organization. When he discovers
performance problems, he is quick to give feedback. The feedback is direct and
sometimes harsh, but he dispenses the feedback in small enough doses that
someone can absorb it, learn from it, and adjust. He teaches his organization that
mistakes are a way of life in the investment business. And how does he respond
to mistakes? First, he doesn’t panic or assign arbitrary blame. One team member
said, “He lets us know that when decisions are collective, the mistakes are

collective, too. No one person takes the blame.” The team then does a
postmortem and learns how to avoid the error a second time. It appears that
Ernest understands how to create an environment that best leverages the
investments he has made in his people.

Liberator No. 2: Close Encounters
Everyone knows Steven Spielberg as an award-winning film director, and it’s
likely that your list of top ten movies includes one of his films. But why are his
movies so successful, grossing an average of $156 million per film? Some would
posit that it is his creative genius and his ability to tell a story. Others would
point to his work ethic. But the true “active ingredient” may be his ability to
elicit more from his crew than other directors do. People who have worked on
Spielberg’s films say, “You do your best work around him.”
One way he elicits the best thinking from people is that he knows what people
are actually capable of producing. Though he knows everyone’s job intimately,
he doesn’t do it for them. He tells them that he has hired them because he
admires their work. He uses his knowledge of the job and of their personal
capabilities to set a standard for demanding their best efforts.
He comes with strong ideas of his own, but he makes it clear that bad ideas
are an okay starting point. He says, “All good ideas start as bad ideas. That’s
why it takes so long.” He establishes an open, creative environment, but he still
demands extraordinary work from his team. One of his crew members said, “He
expects people to be doing their best. And you know it when you aren’t giving
your best.”
And why does Spielberg produce so many successful movies? Because his
crew is twice as productive as those of some of the Tyrant directors we studied.
Because Spielberg creates an environment where people can do their best work,
these artists and staff sign up to work with him again and again. In fact,
Spielberg typically manages two projects simultaneously, each in different
production stages, because his crew stays with him and rolls directly onto the
next project. He gets their best work and 2× the productivity! And they get to
create award-winning films along with him.

Liberator No. 3: A Master Teacher

Stop and think about the best teachers you’ve had. Pause for a moment and
identify one or two. What type of learning environment did they create? How
much space and freedom of thought did you have? What were the expectations
of your performance? In what ways were you stretched and utilized? And how
did you actually perform? I asked these questions of a dozen eighth-grade
students in Mr. Kelly’s class.
Patrick Kelly teaches US history and social studies to eighth-graders at a
distinguished California public school. He caught my attention when I learned
that every year at middle school graduation ceremony, he not only gets more
“shout-outs and thank-yous” from the graduating students than any other
teacher, he gets more than all the other teachers combined. He is more talked
about, more loathed, more beloved than any other teacher at the school. Why?
I got my first glimpse at the fall parent information night at La Entrada Middle
School. It is one of those nights parents with multiple children dread because,
with four children, I have to get to seventeen different teachers’ classes, many
simultaneously, defying laws of physics. My daughter in eighth grade said to
me, “Here’s my class schedule. Get to as many classes as you can, but be sure to
make it to Mr. Kelly’s social studies class. And do not be late. And do not talk
during his presentation. And do not answer your cell phone. And do not be late.
Mom, did you hear me about not being late?” I entered his classroom both
scared and intrigued. After the standard twelve-minute segment with Mr. Kelly, I
left enchanted with eighth-grade social studies, ready to quit my job and go back
to middle school to learn US history.
How does he affect students and parents alike in such powerful ways?
It begins with his classroom environment. He makes it clear that you are there
to work hard, to think, and to learn. One student said, “In his class, he doesn’t
tolerate laziness. You’re always working, thinking things over, and seeing your
mistakes so you can learn from them.” It’s a professional and serious
environment, which gets lighter and more fun as the students work harder. In
this environment, students are encouraged to speak up and voice their opinions.
Equal weight is given to asking a good question and to answering one of his.
Mr. Kelly’s expectations for the students’ learning are both clear and
extremely high. One student said, “He believes that with high expectations come
high results. He demands our best. He makes it clear that if we put in our hardest

effort, we will succeed.” Another said, “He doesn’t hide anything from us and
lets us know what to improve on. He demands that we work to the best of our
ability.” No more, no less—just to the best of their ability. There is no
homework in his class—nothing assigned, nothing arbitrary. Instead, students
are encouraged to do “independent study” to help them understand the ideas and
perform well on tests. The students, having made the choice themselves, do the
independent study with zeal.
Not all students like Mr. Kelly. Some find him too tough, too demanding, and
his expectations unfair compared to other teachers’. For students wanting the
easy path, his class can be an uncomfortable environment. But most students are
engaged by his intelligence and his dedication and thrive under his leadership.
They experience his contagious passion and themselves become passionate
about civil rights, the US Constitution, and their role in the political process.
Patrick Kelly is a Multiplier who liberates his students to think and learn. He
creates an environment where students can speak out but where they are required
to think and perform at their finest. It won’t surprise you that 98 percent of
students in his class score at the “proficient” or “advanced” levels on
standardized state tests, up from 82 percent just three years previously.2

A Hybrid Climate
The secret behind the environment in Mr. Kelly’s classroom (and Ernest
Bachrach’s firm and Steven Spielberg’s movie sets) is in the duality we
consistently found that Liberators embraced. They appear to hold two ostensibly
opposing positions with equal fervor. They create both comfort and pressure in
the environment. In the eyes of the Liberator, it is a just exchange: I give you
space; you give me back your best work.
Liberators also give people space to make mistakes. They create an
environment of learning, but they expect people to learn from the mistakes.
Another fair trade: I give you permission to make mistakes; you have an
obligation to learn from the mistakes and not repeat them.
The power of Liberators emanates from this duality. It isn’t enough just to free
people’s thinking. They create an intense environment that requires people’s best
thinking and their best work. They generate pressure, but they don’t generate
stress.
Liberators operate with this dual operating system much like a hybrid car that
switches over seamlessly between the electric and the gasoline engine. At low
speeds, a hybrid operates in electric mode. At high speeds, it draws on gasoline
to fuel the extra demands on the engine. Such leaders create an open,
comfortable environment where people can freely think and contribute, and
when more power is needed, they invoke their demanding side which commands
only the best performance from others.
How do Liberators create a safe, open environment, and also relentlessly
demand the best thinking and work of those around them? How do they get the
full brainpower of the organization? Let’s turn to the practices of the Liberator
for answers.

The Three Practices of the Liberator
Among the Multipliers we studied in our research, we found three common
practices. Liberators: 1) create space; 2) demand people’s best work; and 3)
generate rapid learning cycles. We’ll examine each in turn.

1. Create Space
Everyone needs space. We need space to contribute and to work. Liberators
don’t take it for granted that people have the space they need. They deliberately
carve out space for others to be able to make a contribution. Let’s look at some
examples of how they do this.

Release Others by Restraining Yourself
It is a small victory to create space for others to contribute. It is a huge victory
to maintain that space and resist the temptation to jump back in and consume it
yourself. This is especially true in formal, hierarchical organizations where
people are accustomed to deferring to their leaders.
Ray Lane, former president of Oracle Corporation and a prominent Silicon
Valley venture capitalist, is a master at executive restraint. One of his portfolio
CEOs remarked, “Ray has learned the importance of restraint in leadership. He
knows that less is more, and he never wastes an opinion.”
When Ray goes on sales calls to meet with executives at a potential client’s,
two things are certain: 1) The client will want to hear from Ray and his vast
experience; and 2) Ray will be prepared. But, despite these forces pulling him in,
he holds back. He offers a few opening pleasantries, but he lets the sales team do
the deal. Issues come up in conversation that Ray has a point of view about, but
still he waits. The sales team, knowing full well that Ray could probably be
doing a better job than they, continue their work nonetheless. When they are
done, Ray then comes into the conversation. He still doesn’t unleash his ideas
and give a monologue. He has listened carefully and knows exactly what he
wants to add. He dispenses his views in small but intense doses.
A longtime colleague of Ray remarked, “He’ll often be quiet for long
stretches of an important meeting. He listens to what others are saying. And
when he does speak, everyone listens.”
Ray is well-known as a brilliant strategist and is perhaps one of the most
articulate communicators in his business. But instead of overplaying himself and
his own ideas, he creates room for others and uses his presence where it can have
the greatest potency and impact for the team.
Shift the Ratio of Listening to Talking
Liberators are more than just good listeners; they are ferocious listeners. They
listen to feed their hunger for knowledge, to learn what other people know and
add it to their own reservoir of knowledge. As the late management guru C. K.
Prahalad once said to me, “How smart you are is defined by how clearly you can
see the intellect of others.” They listen intently because they are trying to learn
and understand what other people know.

John Brandon, one of Apple Inc.’s top sales executives, runs an organization
that brings in tens of billions of dollars in revenue each year across three regions
of the world. John is a high-energy sales leader and maintains an aggressive
travel and meeting schedule, so getting time on his calendar can be tough. But
when his direct reports meet with him one-on-one, they get his whole presence.
John listens intently to them and is keenly interested in understanding their
reality—what is really happening on the ground, with customers and with deals.
He asks probing questions that get to the heart of the matter. One of his direct
reports said, “The difference with John is not that he listens; it is that he listens
to an extreme.” In a typical conversation, he spends 80 percent of the time
listening and asking questions. By listening, asking, and probing, John develops
an understanding of the realities of the business and an understanding with his
team of the opportunities and problems they face. This collective insight into the
market has enabled John’s organization to experience a phenomenal 375 percent
growth over the last five years. John, who can certainly talk a good game
himself, knows when it is time to listen.
Liberators don’t just listen a lot of the time, they listen most of the time,
massively shifting the ratio and creating space for others to share what they
know.

Define a Space for Discovery
John Hoke, Nike Inc.’s chief of global design, gathered his senior leaders for a
week off-site to explore new thinking in design and how leaders can multiply the
talent inside their organization, which I helped facilitate. He wasn’t expecting to
hear that his optimism as a leader was a problem, but he quickly realized that his
hopeful style of leadership might be causing some angst. His team explained the
extraordinary pressure they felt to deliver flawless design, every time. With the
Olympics around the corner and a brand promise to sustain, the group insisted
that there simply was no room to fail.
With John’s encouragement, his team and I decided to define a space for
experimentation. We rapidly laid out their various work scenarios into two
buckets: in one, failure was okay; in the other, success had to be assured. The
group debated each until they agreed on every scenario. Within an hour, they
had created a playground—a safe space for their teams to struggle and
potentially fail without harming their stakeholders or their business. With the
boundaries clearly defined, John’s team didn’t require optimism from above;
hopeful energy radiated from within.
This thinking rippled across Nike’s design community and sparked leaders
such as Casey Lehner, senior director of global design operations, to introduce
the “risk and iterate” performance goal that encouraged each design operations
director to identify something they would take a risk with and then iterate
solutions throughout the year. Casey said, “To me it’s not about failing, it’s
about prototyping. If someone on my team has an idea they want to pursue, I tell
them to go for it—and I’ll provide support if they need it. If it doesn’t work, we
can still learn and evolve from it.”
This “risk and iterate” effort legitimized the possibility of failure and created
safety for designers to tackle the scary problems. One of her twenty staff
members said, “She empowers us to lean into the tension and take risks.”
Another team member said, “She strikes this amazing balance between giving us
the freedom to try things and always having our backs when we need support.”
In 2012, Casey Lehner’s staff secretly nominated her for the Multiplier of the
Year award and then cheered and celebrated her as she won.3

Level the Playing Field
In any formal organization, the playing field is not exactly level, and certain
voices are inherently advantaged. These usually include senior executives,
influential thought leaders, critical organizations like product development or
sales, and people with deep legacy knowledge. Unless the situation is managed,
other voices, that are perhaps closest to the real issues, can be muffled.
Liberators know how to amplify these voices to extract maximum intelligence
and give advantage to the ideas and voices on the lower end of the playing field.
Mark Dankberg is chairman of the board and CEO of ViaSat Inc., which he
cofounded in 1986. Under his leadership, ViaSat has consistently been one of
America’s fastest-growing technology companies and was named three times in
the Inc. 500 list of fastest-growing private companies. Mark presides over a large
firm with $1.4 billion in annual revenue and over 4,000 employees, but he
ensures the inherent hierarchy doesn’t block the best ideas from being heard and
rising up.
Mark operates with the assumption that if you hire really good people, you
don’t need to be limited by org charts. If someone on the engineering side of the
business thinks something is wrong in another area, it is expected that they will
speak up and make sure the company does the right thing. At ViaSat, a VP or
CEO can be challenged by a first-year engineer right out of college. If fact,
junior staff are expected to speak up, and when they do, they are heard. Mark
reflected, “Wisdom doesn’t just come from the top; it comes from all across the
organization. But, as a leader, you have to do more than just not discourage it,
you need to actively encourage people to speak up. The leader has to ask
questions and invite the most junior people to express their ideas.”
Keven is ViaSat’s general counsel, who began working with Mark when he
was a young attorney in an outside law firm. Keven said, “The funny thing is,
regardless of my level, Mark has always treated me the same. With Mark, it’s
about good thinking and providing your well-thought-out point of view. Titles
don’t bring you more respect; it’s about what you’re contributing. When I was
younger Mark always listened to my ideas.” Keven recalls one day when he was
new to ViaSat and working on a holiday. He accompanied his boss into Mark’s
office to share an opinion on a business matter. The debate that ensued went on

for three hours. Keven was deeply impressed that the opinion of a junior attorney
mattered to this CEO and has remained emboldened by this experience years
later.
When ViaSat’s Commerical Mobility business was experiencing rapid
growth, the company assembled a team comprising both veteran leaders and
junior managers to formulate a growth plan. As the team began making
decisions about roles, one veteran manager casually said, “I’ll talk to James
about the role and see what he thinks.” The newer manager looked surprised that
a senior executive would consult with a junior employee: “Talk to him? Don’t
we just decide what he’s going to do? It’s not a democracy.” When he heard
about this, Mark clarified, “Well, ViaSat kind of is a democracy. We don’t just
tell people what their jobs are. We give people choice about what they work on,
as long as they perform at the level their co-workers expect.”
Liberators begin by creating space, but they do more than create space for
others to contribute. They also expect extraordinary work in return.

2. Demand People’s Best Work
Henry Kissinger, US secretary of state under Richard Nixon, was a demanding
diplomat, but he also had some masterful Multiplier moments. According to one
story, his chief of staff once handed in a report he had written on an aspect of
foreign policy. When Kissinger received the report, he asked simply, “Is this
your best work?” The chief thought for a moment and, worried that his boss
would think the report was not good enough, responded, “Mr. Kissinger, I think
I can do better.” So Kissinger gave the report back. Two weeks later the chief
turned in the revised report. Kissinger kept it for a week and then sent it back
with a note that said, “Are you sure this is your best work?” Realizing that
something must have been missing, the chief once again rewrote the report. This
time when he handed the report to his boss he said, “Mr. Kissinger, this is my
best work.” Upon hearing this, Kissinger replied, “Then this time I will read
your report.”4 Here are a few ways that Liberators demand the best from those
they work with.

Defend the Standard
Larry Gelwix, the head coach of Highland Rugby, stood at the center of a
huddle of rugby players at the side of the field for the team’s first game debrief
of the season. Larry asked one question: “Did you give your best?”
One player enthusiastically spoke up, “Well we won, didn’t we?” Not
unkindly, Larry said, “That’s not the question I asked.” Another player jumped
in. “We just dominated that team. We won 64 to 20. What more could you ask
for?” Larry said, “When you came for tryouts, I said I expected your best. That
means your best thinking out there as well as your best physical effort. Is that
what you gave today?”
One player described one game played on the island of Tonga when he could
answer yes to Larry’s question. He said, “I had a painful shoulder contusion after
a devastating tackle on my opponent. I was ready to quit, ready to let my team
down. I couldn’t lift my arm and the pain was excruciating. I remember I began
to chant the haka [a traditional Maori war chant] in my head. I remember
looking over at the sunset through the palm trees. At that very moment the game
seemed to stop, and I had a choice. A voice told me that I needed to keep going
and do my best, not only for myself, but for who I am, and most importantly for
the team—for my brothers. The voice was the recollection of countless practices
and games when Coach Gelwix simply asked, ‘Is that your best?’ I finished that
game with two tries [each the equivalent of a touchdown] becoming the first
high school American to score in Tonga.”
As a manager you know when someone is below his or her usual performance.
What is harder to know is whether people are giving everything they have.
Asking whether people are offering their best gives them the opportunity to push
themselves beyond previous limits. It is a key reason why people report that
Multipliers get more than 100 percent intelligence out of them.

Distinguish Best Work from Outcomes
Requiring people’s best work is different from insisting on desired outcomes.
Stress is created when people are expected to produce outcomes that are beyond
their control. But they feel positive pressure when they are held to their best
work.
K. R. Sridhar, CEO of Bloom Energy, innovator of green-power generators
globally, and a renowned scientist himself, has mastered this distinction in his
company. “If you want your organization to take risks, you have to separate the
experiment from the outcome. I have zero tolerance if someone does not run the
experiment. But I don’t hold them accountable for the outcome of the
experiment. I only hold them accountable to execute.” This is one of Bloom
Energy’s secrets for innovating across complex, integrated technologies.
K. R. understands the distinction between pressure and stress. He cites the
famous image of William Tell shooting an apple off his son’s head: “In this
scenario, William Tell feels pressure. His son feels stress.” K. R. keeps the
pressure on his team to act, but doesn’t create stress by holding them
accountable for outcomes beyond their control.

3. Generate Rapid Learning Cycles
In studying Multipliers, I have often wondered, How smart do you have to be to
be a Multiplier? The answer from Bill Campbell, former chairman and CEO of
Intuit, was perfect: “You have to be smart enough to learn.”
Perhaps most important, Liberators give people permission to make mistakes
and the obligation to learn from them.

Admit and Share Mistakes
When Lutz Ziob took over as general manager of the education business at
Microsoft in 2003, it was falling short of its goals for revenue and reach. Lutz
needed to make progress fast and could have easily created a stressful
environment around him. But he also needed the organization to be creative and
take risks if they were to catch up in the market. It was a classic management
dilemma. If you take the obvious path, the climate will become tense and your
people may become risk averse. But if you lessen the pressure by softening the
goals, then your organization becomes complacent. Lutz did neither.
Instead he created an environment that was equal parts pressure and learning.
Lutz never backed down from the natural pressure for the business to perform,
but he made it safe for people to take risks and make mistakes. He did this by
how he responded to both his mistakes and the mistakes of others.
Lutz does not hide his own mistakes or divert them to his staff, he confesses
them shamelessly. He loves to tell stories, and his favorites are about his
mistakes. When he launched an unsuccessful product, he talked about it openly
and what he learned from it. One member of his management team said, “He
brings an intellectual curiosity for why things didn’t work out.” By taking his
mistakes public, he made it safe for others to take risks and fail.

Insist on Learning from Mistakes
Lutz creates room for other people to make mistakes. When Chris Pirie, the
general manager for sales and marketing working for Lutz, was newly promoted
to lead sales for Microsoft Learning, he tried a risky promotion. Unfortunately, it
didn’t work. But instead of rationalizing the mistake, he went to Lutz and
admitted the misstep, diagnosed it, and then tried something different. Chris
said, “With Lutz, you get to make mistakes. But you are expected to learn fast.
With Lutz, it’s okay to fail. You just can’t make the same mistake twice.”
Lutz loves feedback. He isn’t just open to it, he insists on it. A direct report of
his recalled a time he had to give Lutz some tough love about a critical project
Lutz was particularly excited about. As such, he had been dominating the
discussion and had taken over. Lutz’s direct report scheduled a one-on-one, sat
down in Lutz’s office, and delivered the feedback: “Lutz, you are sucking the
oxygen out of the room. No one else has any room to breathe. You need to back
off.” How do you think Lutz responded? How would you have responded if one
of your people suggested you were a domineering oxygen hog? Lutz’s curiosity
was triggered, and his response was simple. He asked, “What does it look like?
Who did it impact? How do I avoid doing it again?” After taking the time to
understand his mistake, he asked his direct report, “Will you tell me if I do this
again?” His final comment to his direct report was, “I wish you would have told
me sooner.” He really meant it.
Lutz achieved the climate he wanted, even amidst a stressful external
environment, by generating rapid learning cycles. As Chris Pirie said, “Lutz
creates an environment where good things happen.” Even in times of immense
external pressure, Lutz created a climate that drew out people’s best thinking and
work and he maintained a creative intensity.
Tyrants and Liberators both expect mistakes. Tyrants stand ready to pounce
on the people who make them. Liberators stand ready to learn as much from the
mistake as possible. The highest quality of thinking cannot emerge without
learning. Learning can’t happen without mistakes. Liberators get the best
thinking from people by creating a rapid cycle between thinking, learning, and
making and recovering from mistakes in order to generate the best ideas and
create an agile organization. As K. R. Sridhar explained, “We iterate fast so we

can bring cycle time down. The key to this rapid iteration is creating an
environment where people can bring up risks and deal with mistakes sooner.” A.
G. Lafley, former CEO at Procter & Gamble, said, “You want your people to fail
early, fast, and cheap—and then learn from it.”
Diminishers don’t generate these cycles. They might request—if not demand
—people’s best thinking, but they fail to establish the environment where ideas
are easily expressed and developed to full maturity and efficacy.

The Diminisher’s Approach to Environment
Diminishers haven’t developed this smooth duality of comfort and pressure.
Instead, they jerk the organization around as they swing between two modes: 1)
militant insistence on their ideas and 2) passive indifference to the ideas and
work of others.
Timothy Wilson is an award-winning Hollywood property master. He and his
team set the scene and create context for a movie, and he has worked on some of
the biggest and most successful films. He’s a creative genius, but he comes at a
high cost. Why? Because so few people are willing to work with him twice.
One of his staff said, “I’d take any job before working with him.” Signing up
to work with Timothy means working in fear and stress with little enjoyment.
Those who do work for him say, “You don’t want to come back to work the next
day.” From the moment Timothy steps onto the set, the mood changes. People
brace for his criticism. As Jeremy sees Timothy walk over to one of the props
that he had been working on for the last two days, Jeremy wonders which of the
usual insults it will be. Or will he perhaps deliver a rare compliment? Timothy
inspects the prop, and delivers his signature critique, loudly and to the whole
group, “This looks like a prop for a B movie.” And then there are the random
things that set him off. If the prop cart isn’t organized correctly, he goes crazy.
One day he got so tense that he argued with the director of photography and
threw his walkie-talkie at him. The set went from tense to tenser as people
prepared to duck and cover.
Some leaders create an intense environment that requires people’s best
thinking and work. Timothy created a tense environment by dominating the
space, creating anxiety, and judging others in a way that had a stifling effect on

people’s thinking and output.
DOMINATE THE SPACE. Tyrants are like a gas that expands and consumes all the

available space. They dominate meetings and hog all the airtime. They leave
little room for anyone else and often suffocate other people’s intelligence in the
process. They do this by voicing strong opinions, overexpressing their ideas, and
trying to maintain control. Garth Yamamoto, chief marketing officer at a
consumer products company, uses up almost every cubic inch of space in the
room. He jumps in and interrupts people’s presentations, he expresses very
strong and extreme opinions, and either spends his time micromanaging or is
noticeably absent. People warn newcomers in his division, “The art of being
successful around here is figuring out Garth.” One member of his group said, “I
think I am atrophying here. I’m probably giving him about 50 percent.” That
person has since left the organization and is thriving in another company.
The hallmark of a Tyrant is their temperamental and
unpredictable behavior. People don’t know what will set them off, but it is
almost certain that the mood will change when they are around. Tyrants impose
an “anxiety tax” wherever they go, because a percentage of people’s mental
energy is consumed trying to avoid upsetting the Tyrant. Just think of the wasted
productivity on the set with Timothy. Instead of using their full energy making
“A movie” props, Timothy’s team worries about the next thing that Timothy is
going to say or do or, for that matter, throw.
CREATE ANXIETY.

Tyrants centralize their power and play judge, jury, and
executioner. In sharp contrast to the rapid learning cycles of the Liberator,
Tyrants create cycles of criticism, judgment, and retreat. Like the presenters
scurrying to adjust their presentations for Jenna Healy (the telecommunications
sales leader who resembled Miranda Priestly in The Devil Wears Prada), people
retreat to a safe position where their ideas won’t be criticized or exposed. The
Japanese have a saying for this: Deru kui wa utareru, which translates as, “The
stake that sticks out gets hammered down.”
When leaders play the role of the Tyrant, they suppress people’s thinking and
capability. People restrain themselves and work cautiously, only bringing up safe
ideas that the leader is likely to agree with. This is why Diminishers are costly to
JUDGE OTHERS.

organizations. Under the influence of a Diminisher, the organization pays full
price for a resource but only receives about 50 percent of its value.
Diminishers believe that pressure increases performance. They demand
people’s best thinking, but they don’t get it. They haven’t created an
environment where people feel safe to truly express themselves or their ideas.
An unsafe environment yields only the safest ideas. On the other hand,
Multipliers know that people are intelligent and will figure it out. Because they
engage people’s natural intelligence, people offer them back their full
brainpower. Because people have a foundation of safety and comfort, they are
free to offer their boldest ideas, not just the safe ideas that will keep them out of
the wrath of a Tyrant. The environment of learning has enabled them to take
risks, and quickly and inexpensively recover from them.
There is an assumption that underlies the practices of a Liberator: People’s
best thinking must be given, not taken. A manager may be able to insist on
certain levels of productivity and output, but someone’s full effort, including
their truly discretionary effort, must be given voluntarily. This changes the
leader’s role profoundly. Instead of demanding the best work directly, they
create an environment where it not only can be offered, but where it is deeply
needed. Because the environment naturally requires it, a person freely bestows
their best thinking and work.

Becoming a Liberator
Remember that the path of least resistance is often the path of the Diminisher.
As Michael said, “It’s not like it isn’t tempting to be tyrannical when you can.”
Becoming a Liberator requires long-term commitment. Here are a few starting
points.

The Starting Block
1. PLAY FEWER CHIPS. If you want to create more room for others to contribute,

and especially if you are prone to dominating discussions, you might consider a
good game of poker chips.
Matthew is a smart, articulate leader. However, he often found himself
frustrated and running out ahead of his organization, struggling to bring a crossfunctional team along with him and his ideas. He was also struggling to be
heard. He had great ideas, but he was simply talking too much and taking up too
much space in team meetings. I was working with him to prepare a critical
leadership forum for his division. He was eagerly awaiting the opportunity to
share his views about the strategy for advancing the business to the next level.
Instead of encouraging him, I gave him a challenge.
I gave him five poker chips, each worth a number of seconds of talk time. One
was worth 120 seconds, the next three worth 90 seconds, and one was worth just
30. I suggested he limit his contribution in the meeting to five comments,
represented by each of the chips. He could spend them whenever he wished, but
he only had five. After the initial shock and bemusement (wondering how he
could possibly convey all his ideas in five comments), he accepted the challenge.
I watched as he carefully restrained himself, filtering his thoughts for only the
most essential and looking for the right moment to insert his ideas. He played his
poker chips deftly and achieved two important outcomes: 1) He created
abundant space for others. Instead of being Matthew’s strategy session, it
became a forum for a diverse group to voice ideas and cocreate the strategy. 2)
Matthew increased his own credibility and presence as a leader. By exercising
some leadership restraint, everyone was heard more, including Matthew as the
leader.
Try giving yourself a budget of poker chips for a meeting. Maybe it is five;
maybe it is just one or two. Use them wisely, and leave the rest of the space for
others to contribute.
2. LABEL YOUR OPINIONS. As you know, formal organizations can create a strong

deference to the opinions and thinking of the leader. One executive described his
first week as the newly appointed president of a large company. People came at

him from all directions to ask him their pent-up questions. He was new and
wanted to be helpful, so he would offer a casual opinion. To his amazement,
weeks later he found that his opinions had become a set of disjointed policies.
As he unraveled the mess, he learned to carefully label the difference between a
random musing, an opinion, and a policy decision.
Try the practice used by Michael Chang, in his shift to Liberator. Divide your
views into “soft opinions” and “hard opinions”:
Soft opinions: you have a perspective to offer and ideas for someone else
to consider
Hard opinions: you have a clear and potentially emphatic point of view
By doing this, you can create space for others to comfortably disagree with
your “soft opinions” and establish their own views. Reserve “hard opinions” for
when they really matter.
3. TALK UP YOUR MISTAKES. There is no easier way to invite experimentation and

learning than to share stories about your own mistakes. Your acknowledgment,
as a leader, of your mistakes will give others permission to experience failure
and go on to learn and recover with dignity and increased capability.
Great parents do this with their children. They understand that their children
are liberated when they know their parents are human and make mistakes just as
they do. They especially appreciate knowing that their parents learned from their
blunders and recovered. When we help people see a path to recovery, we spawn
a learning cycle.
As you share your mistakes, try these two approaches:
1. GET PERSONAL: Let people know about mistakes you have made and what

you have learned from them. Let them know how you have incorporated
this learning into your decisions and current leadership practices. As a
manager of a consulting group, you might share with your team the time
you led a project that failed and how you dealt with the irate customer.
You can focus on what the experience taught you and how it shaped
your current approach to project management.
2. GO PUBLIC: Instead of talking about mistakes behind closed doors or just

one-on-one, bring them out in the open where the person making a
mistake can clear the air and where everyone can learn. Try making it
part of your management ritual.
As a corporate manager, I would often take this practice to the extreme.
A regular feature in my staff meetings was “screwup of the week.” If any
member of my management team, including myself, had an embarrassing
blunder, this was the time to go public, have a good laugh, and move on.
This simple gesture sent a message to the team: Mistakes are an essential
part of progress.
4. MAKE SPACE FOR MISTAKES. Define the space for experimentation in your

team’s work by clarifying the area where it’s okay to fail versus when failure
isn’t an option. This delineation acts like a ship’s waterline (as described by
management author Jim Collins): above the “waterline,” people can experiment
and take risks and still recover; however, mistakes below the waterline are like
cannonballs that may cause catastrophic failure and “sink the ship.” Creating a
clear “waterline” for your team will give them confidence to experiment and
take bolder action but will signal to them to be extra diligent where the stakes
are high. This distinction will also signal to you when you can stand back and
when you need to jump in and rescue.
Each of the steps outlined above is a simple starting point. But these practices,
if done consistently over time, can allow a leader to become a powerful force for
liberating the intelligence from within an organization.

Free to Think
When people operate under stress, they shut down. With enough stress, they
eventually rebel, often overthrowing their despotic leaders. To build
organizations where people can think and do their best work, we need to do
more than rid our organizations of Tyrants and oppressive dictators. We need
leaders who serve as Liberators, giving people space to think and learn while
applying enough pressure to demand their best work.
Multipliers liberate people from the intimidation of hierarchical organizations
and the domination of tyrannical leaders. Multipliers don’t tell people what to
think; they tell them what to think about. They define a challenge that invites
each person’s best thinking and generates collective will. They create an
environment where every brain is utilized and every voice is heard. Instead of
rebellion, they create a movement.

Chapter Three Summary

The Tyrant Versus the Liberator TYRANTS create a
tense environment that suppresses people’s thinking
and capability. As a result, people hold back, bring up
safe ideas that the leader agrees with, and work
cautiously.
LIBERATORS create an intense environment that requires people’s best thinking

and work. As a result, people offer their best and boldest thinking and give their
best effort.
The Three Practices of the Liberator 1. Create Space • Release others by
restraining yourself • Shift the ratio of listening to talking • Define a space
for discovery • Level the playing field 2. Demand Best Work • Defend the
standard
• Distinguish best work from outcomes 3. Generate Rapid Learning
Cycles • Admit and share mistakes • Insist on learning from mistakes
Becoming a Liberator 1. Play fewer chips
2. Label your opinions
3. Talk up your mistakes
4. Make space for mistakes Leveraging Resources

Unexpected Findings 1. The path of least resistance is often the path of
tyranny. Because many organizations are skewed, a leader can be above
average in an organization and still operate as a Tyrant.
2. Liberators maintain a duality of giving people permission to think while
also creating an obligation for them to do their best work.
3. Multipliers are intense. Leaders who can discern and create the difference
between a tense and an intense climate can access significantly more
brainpower from their organizations.

FOUR

The Challenger

The number one difference between a Nobel Prize winner and others is
not IQ or work ethic, but that they ask bigger questions.
PETER DRUCKER

Matt McCauley took the reins of Gymboree, a $790 million children’s retailer
headquartered in San Francisco, at the age of thirty-three, after coming through
the ranks of planning and inventory management. This made Matt not only the
youngest CEO to head Gymboree in its thirty-year history but also the youngest
CEO of a company in Wall Street’s Russell 2000 index.
McCauley used his youth to keep him open to the ideas of others. “I love to
riff and bounce ideas off of people. Regardless of what their function is,
[Gymboree employees] are all talented, bright people,” says McCauley. Matt
had been a pole vaulter in college. He set one bar at seventeen feet, six inches,
which is what he knew he could clear, and always kept a second bar set at
twenty feet—the world record at the time—to remind himself of what was
possible. Matt took this same approach at work.
RAISING THE BAR. When Matt took over as president, he had the benefit of a

recently rejuvenated product line as well as the challenge of some sloppy
business operations. He saw an opportunity not only to grow sales but also to
vastly increase net income, which at the time stood at $0.69 per share. Using his
deep knowledge of operations and inventory optimization, he estimated the
upside opportunity, then went to the board and told them he believed the

company could achieve $1.00 per share. The board members laughed, but Matt
remained convinced of the possibility.
As Matt met with his management team, he explained his rationale for the
growth opportunity in both sales and earnings per share. He took them through
the calculations for sales and expense optimizations that he had been studying
for the last five years and asked if they could indeed be achieved. He then threw
out “Mission Impossible”—a net income of $1.00. He asked each member of his
management team this question: “What would be your Mission Impossible?” As
the management team caught the enthusiasm of this high-bar approach, they
began to ask the entire organization to do the same. Soon every person inside
this 9,500-person organization had a Mission Impossible goal—a crazy
aspiration. It appeared that being asked to identify their personal Mission
Impossible ignited the charge to make it possible.
CLEARING THE BAR. A year later Matt announced to the board, to Wall Street, and

to every employee in Gymboree that they had achieved not just the “Mission
Impossible” goal of $1.00 but had reached $1.19 per share, a 72 percent
improvement over the previous fiscal year.
Fueled by this accomplishment, what did Matt do next? He set the bar higher
and suggested to the board that they could achieve $2.00 per share. This time the
board thought it was outrageous. But he turned to his organization for support,
sharing his Mission Impossible task and once again asking every person to create
their personal Mission Impossible needed to achieve $2.00 per share. In fiscal
year 2007, they delivered $2.15 per share, an 80 percent improvement.
Again Matt went to the board to suggest $3.00 per share. One year later he
announced $2.67 per share, and two years later, in 2008, an incredible $3.21 per
share. That is a more than 50 percent increase in earnings per share year over
year and an almost fivefold increase in four years.
MISSION IMPOSSIBLE. This young Challenger CEO used his deep knowledge of

the business to see both an opportunity and a path for achieving unheard-of
levels of business performance. He articulated this opportunity and laid down the
challenge for the organization. He then asked each person to join him in
attempting the impossible and to analyze how they might achieve it. By setting
the bar high, he gave people permission to rethink the business. By asking them

to create their personal Mission Impossible, he allowed them to embrace and
step into the challenge themselves. And by acknowledging the impossible nature
of the mission, he gave people permission to try without fear of failure.
Matt got more out of people than they knew they had to give—not because he
convinced them that a goal was possible, but because he invited them to explore
the impossible, that uncertain, uncomfortable place that makes us stretch both
our imagination and our capabilities.
Consider another executive’s approach to setting direction.

The Expert
Richard Palmer founded SMT Systems in the mid-1990s in the United Kingdom
to build systems and tools for business process reengineering. Started as
Richard’s brainchild, the company’s intellectual foundation was built from his
expertise as a business process analyst and in expert systems. The process
reengineering work appealed to Richard’s sense of methodology and superior
strategy, both developed through years of playing chess as a youth.
Not only was Richard one of England’s youngest chess champions (holding a
Master rating), but it was common knowledge throughout the company and
typically the first thing people mentioned about Richard. Chess champion and
Oxford University graduate. He was clearly a genius and the chief genius in the
company. He doesn’t just share his ideas; he sells them, relentlessly and
forcefully. While he thinks he’s inspiring others, it is more like he’s wearing
them down and flogging people into submission. While he gave the title of CEO
to someone else, everyone knew that Richard, who remained the chairman of the
board, was still the one who called the shots on budget, pricing, products,
compensation, and company strategy.
AN ARMY OF PAWNS. The energy changes in a room when Richard enters. It is as

if the headmaster has entered the school assembly. People begin to shrink.
People react the way they might when the calculus teacher gives a surprise oral
quiz, getting smaller—hoping he or she won’t call on them and find them
lacking. Despite the fact that everyone fears the attention will turn to them, the
attention often just stays with Richard, who works to make sure he is seen as the
expert and smartest person in the room.

In one executive management meeting, Richard put the company general
counsel in the hot seat with a pop quiz about a technical distinction on a very
specific legal code regarding corporate governance. Richard had become
concerned that his general counsel didn’t fully understand the nuances of this
particular code that had to be reported to the city, so he began launching
questions. One by one, the general counsel answered them until the questions
became more precise and delved into nuances and obscure scenarios. The
general counsel looked puzzled but answered the questions to the best of his
knowledge. This didn’t satisfy Richard, who left work in time to stop by a
WHSmith bookshop just before it closed. He didn’t buy just any governance
book, he bought the 600-page manual on the most recently announced corporate
governance codes. And he didn’t just look up the answer to the question he’d
asked, he stayed up through the night reading the entire book. The following
day, he called a meeting of the executive team. The topic for this emergency
management meeting was, of course, this particular code. Richard professed his
newfound knowledge and quite publicly let everyone know everything the
general counsel got wrong.
BAD BISHOP. Richard is a master of the Gotcha: he only asks questions that he

knows the answer to. He asks questions to test other people’s knowledge and to
make sure other people understand his point of view. One of his vice presidents
said, “I can’t think of a single time that he has asked a question when he didn’t
know the answer.”
He is also a master of the Stall, which he uses when he doesn’t have the
answer himself. He is known for asking frivolous questions during
teleconferences to stall the conversation while he googles the answers to get
ahead in the conversation. One such stall was during a meeting with an account
team that was planning their sales proposal for a deal with British Telecom. The
sales team was reviewing the proposed contract. Richard, who appeared not yet
to know exactly how the contract should be worded, jumped in with, “How
many of you have read British Telecom’s field operations manual?” The
document was five hundred pages long and not your typical reading for a sales
representative. Wondering if this was a trick question, the team tentatively
confessed that they hadn’t read it. Richard replied with, “How can you even

understand this contract and sell to a BT if you haven’t read the field operations
manual?” The sales process came to a complete standstill while the entire
account team, along with Richard, the founder and chairman of the board, read
the manual. One team member said, “He wasn’t the kind of leader who would
say, ‘I have an idea. Why don’t we look in the manual to better understand the
business and the terms of the contract?’ Instead, he made us look ridiculous for
not doing it.”
FOOL’S MATE. It is no surprise when really smart, talented people don’t stay long

in this organization. Some are asked to leave when the founder finds out they
aren’t as smart as he’d like. Others “quit and stay,” giving up on the idea of
making a meaningful contribution. The sharpest people leave because they see
the wasted time and talent and know the organization can’t grow beyond its
founder. Although the company has been able to grow sales under Richard’s
leadership, most believe that the organization is inherently limited. They remark,
“We’ll never become a serious company.”
One of these two executives operated as a Challenger. The other operated as a
Know-It-All. This chapter is about the difference.

The Know-It-All Versus the Challenger
The approach of these two executives captures the essential difference between
how Know-It-Alls and Challengers provide direction and pursue opportunities
for their organization.
Diminishers operate as Know-It-Alls, assuming that their job is to know the
most and to tell their organization what to do. The organization often revolves
around what they know, with people wasting cycles trying to deduce what the
boss thinks and how to—at least—look like they are executing accordingly. In
the end, Diminishers place an artificial limit on what their organizations can
accomplish. Because they are overly focused on what they know, they limit what
their organization can achieve to what they themselves know how to do.
In setting direction for their organizations, Multipliers have a fundamentally
different approach. Instead of knowing the answer, they play the role of the

Challenger. They use their smarts to find the right opportunities for their
organizations and challenge and stretch their organizations to get there. They
aren’t limited by what they themselves know. They push their teams beyond
their own knowledge and that of the organization. As a result, they create
organizations that deeply understand challenge and have the focus and energy to
confront it.

The Mind of a Multiplier
What are the assumptions that lie at the heart of these different approaches?
Consider our two CEOs. What caused Matt to challenge his organization in a
way that allowed others to do their very best thinking and best work? And why
did other people’s intelligence and capability stagnate around Richard? We
know that both executives are highly intelligent, with a clear vision for their
organizations and a passion for their work. But if we examine their approach to
setting direction, we can distinguish two different logics at work.
Deeply embedded in Richard’s logic is the assumption: I need to have all the
answers. He sees this as the essence of his job as leader. And if he doesn’t know
the answers, he needs to either find them himself or appear to know the answers.
What does he do when he doesn’t have the answer? He stalls until he can find it.
He buys a book on it. He reads the operations manual. He googles the answer.
He assumes his role is to know and to be the expert. It is an assumption that may
have become entrenched in the years he studied expert systems.
If a leader holds the assumption that it is their role to provide the answers, and
if the employees resign themselves to this mode of business, a downward KnowIt-All spiral naturally follows. First, the leader provides all the answers. Second,
subordinates wait for the directives they’ve come to expect. Third, the
subordinates act on the leader’s answers. Finally, the leader concludes they
would never have figured this out without me. He or she sees evidence to support
this belief and concludes: It’s obvious I need to tell others what to do.
Matt’s leadership at Gymboree follows a different logic. He uses his intellect
and energy on two things: first, asking the bold questions, and second, parsing
the challenge into reasonable increments so the team can build intellectual
muscle and the confidence that comes from clearing progressively higher bars.
His assumption seems to be that people get smarter and stronger by being

challenged. As people embrace the challenge, both their insights and the belief
grows. Soon, the impossible begins to look possible.
If leaders have to spread their intelligence across asking the questions and
finding all the answers, they tend to ask questions they already know the answers
to. Once a leader accepts that he or she doesn’t have to have all the answers, he
or she is free to ask much bigger, more provocative, and, frankly, more
interesting questions. They can pursue things they don’t know how to do.
Let’s look at another Challenger in action.

The Challenger
By 1995, the Oracle Corporation was headquartered in the affluent waterfront
neighborhood of Redwood Shores on the San Francisco Peninsula. Oracle had
begun retooling its products for the Internet, but the business strategy was still
unclear. The challenge of figuring it out would fall to Ray Lane, Oracle’s
president, who had joined Oracle two years earlier and had grown the US
business from $571 million to $1.2 billion.
RAY’S REVOLUTION. Ray decided to gather the top 250 leaders of the company

from across the globe in a series of forums to educate them on the corporate
strategy and to align the leadership team behind this strategy. Ray and the other
senior executives, including CEO Larry Ellison and CFO Jeff Henley, prepared
their strategy presentations and gathered the first group of thirty executives.
They gave their presentations and held discussions, but as the week went on, the
group became more and more confused. One VP spoke for the group when he
said, “We aren’t clear on the strategy. We just saw a lot of PowerPoint slides.”
Ray and his team went back to the drawing board and did a major overhaul of
their presentations. They invited another group of thirty executives. This time
the feedback was different: all-out revolt. One of the executives took a risk and
said, “Stop getting people together until there is a clear strategy!” The team was
not buying what Ray and the rest of the team were selling.
INDEPENDENCE DAY. The senior executive team quickly regrouped at Ray’s house

on their first available day, the Fourth of July. They realized the global business

had become more complex and diverse than they originally thought and that they
couldn’t build this strategy alone at corporate. So they decided to take a
fundamentally different approach. Ray and the executive team had started out
trying to tell others all the answers. Now they switched to sharing the
fundamental questions, trends, and assumptions that were shaping their views.
When they came back together with the next forum of leaders, Ray and the
other executives shared what they saw happening in the business and where they
saw the world going. Ray seeded the opportunities that these trends would
present for Oracle and presented a framework for a strategy—four key
transformations needed in the business. And then, with this broad stroke of his
brush, he stopped telling and started asking, “Are these the transformations
needed in the business?” and “Which of our assumptions about the future might
be wrong?”
Ray gave the group a challenge to fill in the blanks. The team would have two
days to examine each of the four transformations, identify milestones, and
pinpoint the implications for the business, and then pass their thinking on to the
next group of leaders, who would go further. The group did exactly that,
advancing the thinking of the executive team and then handing off their work to
the next group of executives. The group reveled in their collective success and
left the forum knowing that they had begun something big. The process
continued until every SVP and VP had been involved and each group had
challenged the work that had been done before them. They took their task
seriously, turning the strategy upside down and sideways as they looked for
holes, logic flaws, and vulnerabilities. In the end, they emerged with both a
validation and a refinement of the collective thinking. And momentum was still
building.
THE CONVENTION. Ray and the other executives culminated this process by

convening the entire leadership team of the company. The executive team
unveiled the strategic intent of the organization and the transformations needed
in the business. The reaction of the global leadership team was overwhelming
enthusiasm and optimism, knowing they would be making business history. The
strategy was fresh and compelling, yet it was familiar to them because they had
cocreated it and could see their fingerprints on it.

When the meeting was divided into regional breakouts, the scene was far from
typical. Instead of a discussion about “why this won’t work in Europe, the
Middle East, and Africa (EMEA),” the conversation in the EMEA breakout
room was almost boisterous with questions like, “What is the first step?” and
“Where can we start implementing this in Germany?” The scene in the Japanese
breakout room said it all. They discussed the strategy and its implications for
Japan, and then, with quiet fervor, began to organize as if they were going to
battle.
What was unveiled in the meeting and the breakout sessions was a
manifestation and statement of the collective will of the organization. In the next
four years, under Ray Lane and Larry Ellison’s leadership, Oracle led the
enterprise computing market and grew from $4.2 billion to $10.1 billion, more
than doubling revenues.
Ray Lane began with an honest attempt to sell a strategy to the organization.
But he emerged a more powerful leader when he first seeded the opportunity,
then laid down the stretch challenge for the organization. By doing this, he
wasn’t setting the direction, he was ensuring the direction was set and operating
as a Challenger.

The Three Practices of the Challenger
How does the Challenger engage the full brainpower of the organization?
Among the Multipliers we studied in our research, we found three common
practices. Multipliers: 1) seed the opportunity; 2) lay down a challenge; and 3)
generate belief. We’ll examine each in turn.

1. Seed the Opportunity
Multipliers understand that people grow through challenge. They understand that
intelligence grows by being stretched and tested. So, even if the leader has a
clear vision of the direction, he or she doesn’t just give it to people. Multipliers
don’t give answers. Instead they begin a process of discovery: they provide just
enough information to provoke thinking and to help people discover and see the
opportunity for themselves.
We’ll outline a few of the ways that Multipliers seed opportunity and begin

the discovery process.
Show the Need
One of the best ways to seed an opportunity is to allow someone else to
discover it themselves. When people can see the need for themselves, they
develop a deep understanding of the issues, and quite often, all the leader needs
to do is get out of their way and let them solve the problem.
The Bennion Center, on the University of Utah campus, was established to
encourage students to engage in community service projects and activism while
in college. Irene Fisher, the center’s director for fourteen years, was hopeful that
the students would sign up for some of the city’s toughest problems.
Instead of making a speech or just selling her vision of service to the poorest
members of the community, Irene invited students to take a leadership position
and organize other students to work with the community. She took them
downtown into the inner-city community so they could see the issues for
themselves. They walked the streets and observed the plight of the homeless.
They visited shelters and talked with single mothers struggling to get by.
Because they saw the needs for themselves, they became passionate and curious
about how to create change, and learned rapidly in the process. As their
involvement grew, these student leaders assumed more and more challenging
roles. She noted, “University students are pretty smart. Once they see something
they start asking questions. Our students asked a lot of questions and then went
to work.” Irene seeded the opportunity and allowed the students to take the
challenge. Irene added, “I don’t see myself as a challenger per se. I think of
creating the opportunity for people to see the challenge so they can respond to
it.”
The Bennion Center is still thriving today, built on the assumption that you
don’t get the most out of people if you just tell them what to do. You get full
effort if you help people discover opportunity and then challenge themselves.
Challenge the Assumptions
Multipliers ask the questions that challenge the fundamental assumptions in an
organization and disrupt the prevailing logic. Renowned management guru and
strategy professor C. K. Prahalad was known for asking the questions that
challenged the fundamental assumptions of an organization. He understood that

strategy is about understanding and questioning assumptions. When working
with management teams in leading corporations, C. K. had a penchant for asking
the unsettling questions that rattled their assumptions and enabled them to see
market opportunities and threats in a different light.
In working with the Philips corporation, a multinational manufacturing
company, and after carefully interviewing each member of the executive team to
uncover their core assumptions about the business and the tensions in the
organization, he could see that they had an assumed invincibility in the market.
C. K. formulated a plan. When he arrived at their executive strategy offsite, he
began with a fictitious article he’d written that might appear in the New York
Times forecasting a bankruptcy at Philips. He then launched the following
questions: What changes in the current competitive landscape would devastate
Philips’s revenue stream? What if companies A and B merged? What market
changes could lead to a bankruptcy? What is your game plan if it happens? The
room became ominously silent. He had shaken their beliefs upon which the
current business strategy was based. With the full interest of the executive team,
he guided the discussion as they began to explore the answers.
Reframe Problems
Multipliers understand the power of an opportunity. As Peter Block,
consulting guru and author, observed, “the most powerful work is done in
response to an opportunity not in response to a problem.” Multipliers analyze
problems, but they also reframe them to show the opportunity presented by the
challenges.
Consider how Alan G. Lafley, when he was CEO of Procter & Gamble,
reframed the problems of generating revenue growth from new product R&D as
part of his overall revitalization of the company.
As Larry Huston and Nabil Sakkab explain in their Harvard Business Review
article “Connect and Develop,” the “invent-it-themselves” model was no longer
allowing P&G to sustain a high level of top-line growth. At $25 billion the
company could still manage to do it, but beyond $50 billion it was impossible
and P&G lost half of their market cap as their stock fell from $118 to $52 a
share.
Rather than falling into the trap of doing more of the same, Lafley developed

a new strategy of sourcing their innovation from the outside. The shift was from
“not invented here” to “proudly invented elsewhere.” Rather than thinking of
innovation as “invention” where the R&D has to be done in your own physical
labs, Lafley looked for ways to join forces with people in their supply chain
whom they could partner with to innovate more rapidly.
For example, Huston and Sakkab relate, when the idea emerged to produce
Pringles potato chips with pictures and words printed on the crisps themselves,
P&G had to decide whether to create an end-to-end solution from scratch, or
whether to find an innovative solution somewhere within their partner network.
In the past, bringing a new product to market represented a two-year investment.
But with Lafley’s new reframe, they could see a smarter path.
In the case of Pringles, they “created a technology brief that defined the
problems [they] needed to solve, and [they] circulated it throughout [their]
global networks of individuals and institutions to discover if anyone in the world
had a ready-made solution. It was through [their] European network that [they]
discovered a small bakery in Bologna, Italy, run by a university professor who
also manufactured baking equipment.”1 The professor’s innovation allowed
P&G to get to market in half the time and at a fraction of the cost of inventing
the solutions in-house. The product was an immediate hit that led the Pringles
division to enjoy double-digit growth for the next two years.
Create a Starting Point
Multipliers provide a starting point but not a complete solution. In this way,
they generate more questions than answers. These questions then encourage their
team to fully define the opportunity while giving them confidence that they are
building on a solid foundation.
Ray Lane and Oracle’s top executives created the skeleton of a strategic
framework and then asked groups of senior leaders to work systematically and
collaboratively to complete the whole strategy.
When a Challenger has successfully seeded an opportunity, other people can
see the opportunity for themselves. And because the opportunity has been
planted but is not fully grown, others are taken through a process of discovery.
This process of exploration and discovery sparks intellectual curiosity and
begins to generate energy for the challenge. The answers are not clear yet, so

people know “there is still something for me to do,” and they feel motivated to
step in and be involved.

2. Lay Down a Challenge
Once an opportunity is seeded and intellectual energy is created, Multipliers
establish the challenge at hand in such a way that it creates a huge stretch for an
organization. While Diminishers create a huge gap between what they know and
what other people know, Multipliers create a space between what people know
and what they need to know, and that draws people into the challenge. They
establish a compelling challenge that creates tension. People see the tension and
the size of the stretch and are intrigued and, perhaps, even puzzled.
How does a Multiplier achieve this level of stretch without breaking an
organization? How do you create intrigue rather than apprehension? In our
research, we found that Multipliers achieve this energizing stretch in three ways.
First, they extend a clear and concrete challenge. Then they ask the hard
questions that need to be answered to achieve the challenge, but—most
important—they don’t answer them. They let others fill in the blanks.
Extend a Concrete Challenge
Sean Mendy is the senior director of development at Boys and Girls Clubs of
the Peninsula. Sean previously oversaw the club’s after-school program in East
Palo Alto, California, a city that in 1992 had the highest per capita murder rate in
the United States and where dropping out of high school is a norm. Sean himself
faced many challenges growing up, but went on to attend and graduate from
Cornell University and then earn graduate degrees from Stanford University and
the University of Southern California. With a journey like Sean’s, he has ample
reason to tell the teens he works with what they need to do to succeed. But
instead of telling, he challenges.
When Sean first met Tajianna Robinson (or Taji), she was a shy and hesitant
twelve-year-old. When she reluctantly shook his outstretched hand, he stopped
her and with a big smile said, “You know, there are three things you might want
to do when you meet someone. First, look them in the eye. Second, give them a
firm hand. Third, shake their hand up and down three full times.” Taji was

appalled but intrigued.
Sean continued to extend small, specific challenges to her. He asked Taji if
she would take a newspaper class. She did. Then he encouraged her to write a
main article for the school paper, meet regularly with a writing tutor, and learn
how to write a great essay. Again, she did. Next, he encouraged her to raise the
bar and compete in her school’s Scholar of the Year competition. She won!
Sean extends these challenges by asking youths hard questions and then
giving them the space to think and respond. As Taji put it, “He taught me to
think for myself.” This allows Taji and others to strengthen intellectual muscles
and build the confidence they need to tackle the hardest challenges.
Early on with Taji, Sean looked her in the eye and asked, “If you could get out
of this environment, what would you do?” There was a long silence. Finally Taji
said, “I’d go to college.” Sean responded, “What would it take for you to do
that?” After several moments of reflection, her eyes lit up and she said, “I’d need
to get into the right high school!” They set a goal for Taji to earn a scholarship to
one of the top-tier prep schools in the surrounding area. Sean asked, “Where
should we start?”
Taji led the process, but together they figured out which schools would be the
best fit. They completed applications and prepared for her high school
interviews. The night before one of the biggest interviews, Taji’s family left her
at home to do her homework while they went out for a drive. As the family
pulled up to a stop sign, a gunman approached the car, firing multiple bullets
into the vehicle that was transporting three small children. Taji’s older cousin
was shot in the back, and her six-year-old sister was shot in the leg. Nobody
died, but it was traumatic in every conceivable way.
The next morning Sean suggested Taji might want to reschedule the high
school interview they had planned. But through her emotions she yelled, “This is
how I am going to get out of here! This is what I need to do to have the kind of
life I want. And this is how I can help my family and make sure it doesn’t
happen again!” She wiped her tears, went to the interview, and blew away
everyone she met. Tajianna was accepted to four competitive preparatory
schools, earning full scholarships to each. Taji grew into a resilient, motivated,
bright young teen, attended Sacred Heart, a private school in Atherton,
California, and is now in college.

Out of the seventeen students in Sean’s eighth-grade program, twelve have
received scholarships to prestigious prep schools and the other five have entered
rigorous college-track programs. Sean served as a Challenger, helping these
youth raise their aspiration level and build the mental agility they would need to
get and stay on a course of success.
Whether it is Matt McCauley at Gymboree extending the $2.00 challenge or
Sean Mendy issuing the college-bound challenge, our research showed that
Multipliers use their intelligence to make challenges concrete for others. These
challenges become tangible and measurable, allowing people to assess their
performance. By making a challenge real, they allow others to visualize the
achievement and communicate the confidence that the organization has the
collective brainpower required. This confidence is essential, because the
challenge will demand that the entire organization extend itself beyond its
current reach and capability.
Ask the Hard Questions
Diminishers give answers. Good leaders ask questions. Multipliers ask the
really hard questions. They ask the questions that challenge people not only to
think but to rethink. They ask questions so immense that people can’t answer
them based on their current knowledge or where they currently stand. To answer
these questions, the organization must learn. Enabled by these big questions, a
vacuum is created in the space between what people know and what they need to
know, and a vacuum between what they can currently do and what they need to
be able to do. This vacuum creates a deep tension in the organization and raises a
need to reduce that tension. It is like a rubber band that is stretched to its limit.
One side needs to move toward the other to reduce the tension.
Matt McCauley at Gymboree created this forward pull when he asked each
member of his organization, “What is your Mission Impossible?” By
establishing this tension, it became impossible to stay in the same place.
Let Others Fill In the Blanks
How do Multipliers get people to step into a challenge? They shift the burden
of the thinking to others. Initially, when they establish a concrete challenge, the
burden of the thinking sits with them as the leader. By asking the hard questions
and inviting others to fill in the blanks, they are shifting the burden of thinking

onto their people. The onus now sits with their team to understand the challenge
and find a solution. In this shift, the Multiplier creates intelligence and energy
around him or herself.
After assuming leadership of a new division in a large consumer electronics
company in Korea, the CEO called his management team together and informed
them of his goals to be number one in the market and to become a magnet
company attracting top college graduates. He was clear that the trajectory for the
organization would not be incremental. He had a vision of something big. He
then engaged a broad array of stakeholders in analyzing how to achieve the
number one position. The coalition included key executives, founding family
members, and outside consultants. Assembling the coalition, he seeded the
opportunity and posed the difficult questions, such as, “Why are we in this
business?” and “Do we deserve to be in this business?” and “What would it take
to be better than our competition?”
These questions cut to the bone of the organization and stirred up chaos. Yet
he never backed down. The tension forced the team to generate answers. He
asked the hard questions and then let the team fill in the blanks. As they did, he
maintained a tight time frame. He said, “I don’t need 100 percent answers. I
need a 30 percent answer in two days. Give me a 30 percent answer so we can
talk about it and decide if it makes sense for you to find a 50 percent answer.
And if we get there, we’ll block two months to get a 100 percent answer.”
In the end there were clear answers. The process took months and was
scrappy, but it built the intellectual muscle and energy the organization needed
for the challenge.
Laying down a challenge means more than directing people to do it. It
includes asking the hard questions that no one yet has the answers to and then
backing off so that the people within the organization have the space to think
through the questions, take ownership, and find the answers.
When a Multiplier has successfully laid down the challenge, people see the
stretch, are intrigued, and become intellectually engaged. The burden of thinking
has been shifted to the organization. This process of ownership and stretch
continues to build energy by creating the intellectual muscle for the challenge.

3. Generate Belief

By seeding the opportunity and laying down a challenge, people are interested in
what is possible. But this isn’t enough to create movement. Multipliers generate
belief—the belief that the impossible is actually possible. It isn’t enough that
people see and understand the stretch; they need to actually stretch themselves.
The following are a few ways we discovered that Multipliers produce this
belief in their organizations.
Helicopter Down
One way Multipliers generate belief is by taking the challenge down to the
ground level. K. R. Sridhar, CEO of Bloom Energy, whose vision is to produce
power generators for homes and businesses at half the carbon emissions of
traditional power generators, explains, “The direction needs to be improbable but
not impossible. It can’t just exist at 30,000 feet. It has to be at the 1,000 foot
level. It is irresponsible to ask your team to do something if the CEO exposure is
only at the 30,000 foot level. You have to take it down and show that it can be
done. You have to show them a pathway and show why it can be done. You only
need to do this once to create the belief.” By “helicoptering” down to reality,
Multipliers create a meaningful proof point that a bold challenge can be
successfully met.
Cocreate the Plan
When people create the plan that they eventually will implement, belief in its
viability will be inherently high. Led by Ray Lane in 1996, Oracle not only built
a strategic intent, it also built a deep belief within the organization that Oracle
could lead the Internet era. Because 250 senior leaders were given the
opportunity to cocreate the corporate strategy, they understood the challenge
ahead and knew what actions would be necessary to achieve it. They had built
the collective will and energy needed to execute. The organization was ready to
take the challenge.
Orchestrate an Early Win
Sometimes, the temptation exists for leaders to tackle too many problems all
at once. Our research showed that Multipliers begin with small, early wins and
use those to generate belief toward the greater stretch challenges.
Consider Nobel Prize winner Wangari Maathai, who passed away in 2011. In

her words, “I was hearing many Nairobi women complain that they didn’t have
enough firewood, they were also complaining that they did not have enough
water. ‘Why not plant trees?’ I asked them. And so they just started, very, very,
very small. And before too long they started showing each other. Communities
began empowering each other to plant trees for their own needs.”2
From just seven original trees planted by Wangari on June 5, 1977, on World
Environment Day, the Green Belt movement has successfully planted more than
40 million trees in Africa. And, of course, the movement goes beyond trees.
Wangari has written, “Many people don’t understand that the tree is just an entry
point. It is an easy point. Because it is something that people understand. It is
something people can do. It is not very expensive to do it. And you don’t need
too much technology to do it. But once we get into the community through tree
planting, we deal with a lot of other issues. We deal with issues of governance,
issues of human rights, issues of conflicts and peace, [and] issues of long-term
resource management.”
Senior leaders in corporations can generate belief about significant challenges
by orchestrating small, early wins.
When the Multiplier has generated belief in what is possible, the weight shifts
and the organization is willing to leave the realm of the known and venture into
the unknown.
The Academy Award–winning documentary Man on Wire chronicles the feat
of renowned high-wire artist Philippe Petit in 1974 as he walked a tightrope
stretched 140 feet across the expanse between the 1,368-foot-high Twin Towers
of the World Trade Center in New York City. In the movie, Petit explains the
moment of truth when he stood on the edge of one tower with his back foot on
the building and his front foot on the cable. “I had to make a decision of shifting
my weight from one foot anchored to the building to the foot anchored on the
wire. This is probably the end of my life to step on that wire! On the other hand,
something I could not resist . . . called me up on that cable.”
I have seen this shift of weight happen many times inside organizations. You
can almost feel the energy of the organization begin to tip in a new direction.
This shift happens when an individual or organization has fully embraced a
challenge and has generated the belief in what is possible. It is not the Multiplier
who whips up this belief. Rather, it is the challenge he or she has issued that

generates this commitment. This challenge process builds the intellectual
muscle, the emotional energy, and the collective intent to move forward.
Multipliers orchestrate the process needed to shift the weight of an organization.

The Diminisher’s Approach to Setting
Direction
In contrast to Multipliers, Diminishers have a fundamentally different approach
to providing direction. Instead of using their intelligence to enable people to
stretch toward a future opportunity, they give directions in a way that showcases
their superior knowledge. Instead of seeding an opportunity and laying out a
believable challenge, Diminishers tell and test. Like the stereotypical Know-ItAll, they tell people what they know, tell people how to do their jobs, and test
other people’s knowledge to see if they are doing it right.
TELLING WHAT THEY KNOW. Diminishers consider themselves thought leaders

and readily share their knowledge; however, they rarely share it in a way that
invites contribution. They tend to sell their ideas rather than learning what others
know. One manager in Europe “took up all the oxygen in the room” by talking
endlessly about his ideas. A peer said of him, “He is so busy sharing what he
thinks, there is no space for anyone else.” A direct report added this insight, “I
have worked in the same department with him for ten years, and he has never
asked me a question. Not once. Not ever. I have occasionally heard him ask a
question to the universe, ‘I wonder why we do X?’ but even then he fills the
silence with his own thoughts about the answer.”
TESTING WHAT YOU KNOW. When Diminishers do actually engage others, it’s no

surprise that they want to verify that you understand what they know. They ask
questions to make a point rather than to access greater insight or to generate
collective learning. Like Richard Palmer, the founder discussed earlier, they are
masters of the Gotcha question. Diminishers leave people stressed, but
unstretched.
TELLING PEOPLE HOW TO DO THEIR JOBS. Rather than shift responsibility to other

people, Diminishers stay in charge and tell others—in detail—how to do their
jobs. They assume the senior thinker posture, giving themselves permission to
generate both the questions and the answers.
One such Diminisher was Chip Maxwell, an executive producer on a major
motion picture production set. Despite the fact that the director had carefully
assembled a world-class team of talent, Chip was constantly interfering in the
team’s work, routinely bypassing the director to tell his staff exactly how to do
their jobs. The director of photography abruptly resigned in the middle of
filming, claiming that if Chip seemed to know how to light the shot better than
he did, then maybe he could be the DP. This award-winning DP knew the
number of lights needed, and he certainly knew where to put them. He also knew
his talents could be better used on another film.
Diminishers often unintentionally shut down the intelligence of others. Most
Diminishers have built their careers on their own expertise and have been
rewarded for their superior knowledge. For many, it is not until they reach a
career plateau or crisis—or the director of photography quits in the middle of
filming—that they begin to recognize that their base assumptions are inaccurate
and are limiting themselves and others.
A colleague of mine recently took an IQ test and received a score of 144. He
was exuberant and claimed that he was just one point shy of certified genius
status. No doubt he was envisioning his welcome letter from Mensa. On learning
of our research, his enthusiasm became a bit dampened: “Wow. I have worked
all my life to prove I am a genius, and just at the point that I can say that I am, I
learn that it doesn’t even matter anymore!”
Of course, this is only half right. Raw mental horsepower is still relevant. But
the most powerful leaders are those who not only have this mental horsepower
themselves but also know how to multiply it by accessing and stretching other
people’s intelligence. Consider the difference between a leader who yearns for
an additional IQ point to take their IQ to 145, official Genius Level, and leaders
who use their intelligence to add an IQ point to every person in their
organization! What could your organization accomplish if every person became
effectively “one point smarter”?
There are times when a leader is so knowledgeable and personally brilliant
that it seems tempting for them to provide directives centered in what they know.

However, in the end, Know-It-Alls limit what their organization can achieve to
what they themselves know how to do. Under their leadership, the organization
never leverages its full intelligence, and the true capacity of the organization is
idled away or becomes consumed by the “fire drill” of figuring out what the boss
thinks.
DIMINISHERS CREATE IDLE CYCLES. A highly intelligent vice president at a major

global technology firm was accustomed to a fast-paced and demanding
environment. He was a competitor in the market who never stopped challenging
himself and others. However, after transferring to a division led by a classic
Know-It-All, he found himself idle most of the time. He said, “I spend most of
my time waiting for my boss to make decisions. In the meantime, I can’t do
much else. I am essentially working part-time. I’m bored, but I am enjoying
taking sailing lessons!” This vice president was ready for high-speed battle but
was relegated to easy sailing.
In contrast, Multipliers create rapid cycles. By playing the Challenger instead
of the Know-It-All, they access more brains, get those brains working faster, and
earn the full discretionary effort of their people. Once they have a clear view of
latent opportunities and challenges, they understand that there are no resources
worthy of waste. Under the direction of Challengers teams are able to accelerate
their performance. Because the organization does not have to wait for the leader
to think of it first, they can solve tougher problems at an accelerated rate.
Because people understand the context, they can act for themselves rather than
wait to be told or approved. Because they are encouraged to be “smarter than the
leader,” people can stop competing for idea validation and instead commit
themselves to the challenge. And the result is that intelligence grows—
individually and collectively. The collective intent built within the organization
enables the whole group to break through challenges no single leader, however
intelligent, could have done alone.
This understanding leads to a key question: how does someone provide
direction like Matt McCauley at Gymboree or Ray Lane at Oracle? How does
someone go from a Know-It-All to a Challenger?

Becoming a Challenger

Challengers start with developing their overactive imagination and a serious case
of curiosity. In our research, we analyzed how Multipliers and Diminishers were
rated against forty-eight leadership practices. It is not surprising that the highestrated practice for Multipliers was Intellectual Curiosity. Multipliers create genius
in others because they are fundamentally curious and spark learning in those
around them. The question “why” is at the core of their thinking and takes the
form of an insatiable need for deep organizational understanding. Challengers
are Multipliers who ponder possibilities. They want to learn from people around
them. At the heart of any challenge is intellectual curiosity: I wonder if we could
do the impossible? When deeply rooted in a mindset of curiosity, one is ready to
begin working as a Challenger. Here are several starting points.

The Starting Block
1. TAKE THE EXTREME QUESTIONS CHALLENGE. Most executives are barraged with

questions, constantly responding to others seeking their opinion. The nature of
the executive role makes it easy to stay rooted in answer mode and to be the
boss. A bad leader will tell people what to do. A good leader will ask questions
and let his or her people figure out the answers. A great leader asks the questions
that focus the intelligence of their team on the right problems. The first step in
this journey is to stop answering questions and begin asking them.
Several years ago I was commiserating with a colleague at work about our
parenting challenges. Brian also had several small children, so he was simpatico
as I lamented that I had become a bossy mom, constantly telling my kids what to
do and barking orders. I detailed a typical evening at my house: “Get ready for
bed. Stop that. Leave her alone. Pick up your toys. Put on your pajamas. Brush
your teeth. Go back and use toothpaste this time. Story time. Get into bed. Go
back to bed. No, not in my bed, your bed. Okay, now go to sleep.”
Now, I wasn’t looking for advice—this was purely recreational complaining.
But Brian offered an interesting challenge. He said, “Liz, why don’t you go
home tonight and try speaking to your children only in the form of questions. No
statements, no directives, no orders. Just questions.” I quickly countered, “But
this is impossible. I’ll be home by six o’clock p.m. and I can’t get them to go to
sleep until nine thirty. That’s three and a half hours!” Brian assured me that he

understood and reiterated the challenge, “No statements. Just questions.” As I
drove home I became more intrigued and decided I would take the challenge to
the extreme. Everything I said would be a legitimate question.
I summoned strength, opened the house door, and began the experiment.
Dinner and playtime were interesting. When it got close to bedtime, I looked at
my watch and asked my children, “What time is it?” One responded, “It’s
bedtime.” I continued, “What do we do to get ready for bed?” They explained,
“We get our pajamas on.” “Okay, who needs help?” The two-year old did, so I
helped him while the girls got themselves dressed for bed. “What’s next?” I
asked. Their responses showed remarkable understanding of the bedtime routine
and eagerness to act. Soon their teeth were brushed. “What story will we read
tonight? . . . and whose turn is it to pick the story? And who is going to read it?”
After story time I asked, “Who is ready for bed?” Eagerly, they said their prayers
and hopped into their beds. And stayed there. And then nodded off to sleep.
I stood in the hallway in shock and wondered, Have I just witnessed a
miracle? What has happened to my children? And, How long have they known
how to do this?
I was intrigued by this dramatic change in our home, so I continued the
experiment a couple more nights. Yes, I did return to a more balanced pattern of
communication, but not before the experience had a profound and permanent
shift in the way I led. When I moved out of the mode of giving the answers and
started asking the questions, I discovered that my kids knew how to do a lot of
things that I had been doing for them. I decided to try it at work. I began asking
questions like, “What do you think might go wrong?” or “How can we solve this
problem?” As I began to tell less and ask more, I found that my management
team was even smarter than I had previously seen. Most of the time, they didn’t
need me telling them what to do; they needed me to ask an intelligent question.
I learned that the best leaders ask questions and let other people find answers.
Take the Extreme Question Challenge to shift from Know-It-All into
Challenger mode. Start with 100 percent. Try it at home—you might find that
your children (or housemates) are good guinea pigs and great teachers! At work,
take the first step by finding a meeting that you can lead solely with questions.
You might be surprised at what people around you already know. If you’re
concerned this extreme approach will seem abrupt or strange, let your team

know you’re experimenting with a new approach. While taking the Extreme
Question Challenge is a useful exercise for disrupting existing patterns of
behavior, it’s not intended to be a permanent mode of operating. Once you’ve
developed a greater ability and propensity to lead through questions, you can
strike an appropriate balance between inquiry and advocacy, especially one that
is in harmony with your national culture.
2. CREATE A STRETCH CHALLENGE. Engage your team by giving them a “mission

impossible,” a hard, concrete challenge that will stretch them and develop new
capabilities. Identify a major challenge and start the team by getting specific.
Make it an intriguing puzzle by detailing the constraints, such as, “How do we
accomplish X by Y date, with only Z resources available to us?” Then stand
back and let your team solve the puzzle. When leaders offer a challenge and then
create a culture of belief, the organization steps up. People contribute beyond
what they thought they could. Your team will likely report the experience as
“exhausting but totally exhilarating” and will want to sign up for another stretch.
3. TAKE A BUS TRIP. University of Michigan professor Noel Tichy tells a story

about an executive at GE who found a creative way to seed a challenge and help
his organization see a need in the marketplace.3 When Tom Tiller took over the
failing appliance division at GE, the division was losing money, slashing its
workforce, and hadn’t released a new product in years. Tom loaded forty people
from his management team onto a rented bus and headed for the Atlanta Kitchen
and Bath Show. The group was to find trends and needs, and generate new
product ideas that would keep the plant alive. The group developed a new line of
products and turned around the division, from a staggering loss to a $10 million
profit.
There are many ways to take a bus trip. Irene Fisher of the Bennion Center
took people into the inner city so they could see the needs of the poor firsthand.
As a corporate manager, you might visit a customer’s factory floor to watch how
a customer actually uses your product. You can take your team down to the local
mall to watch people shop. But take that bus (or van or train) trip together. Help
people see the need that must be met. Make it a learning experience that will
reveal that need, create energy, and ignite a fire within your organization.

4. TAKE A MASSIVE BABY STEP. The corporate world has a plethora of terms for

this: creating an early win, delivering a symbolic victory, and—the favorite—
picking the low-hanging fruit. The problem is that most leaders do this in
isolation. They pick a small group to run a pilot, which catches the attention of
management but doesn’t have the visibility to get the attention of the entire
organization. Instead, do it en masse. Make it visible. Create a conference room
pilot for a new technology and hold an open house. Win back an important
customer through the efforts of a cross-functional task force. Get the entire
organization to take a small, first step. But do it together so everyone can see the
results and start to believe that something great is possible. This belief is what
will shift the weight of the organization out onto that high wire.

A Good Stretch
Jimmy Carter said, “If you have a task to perform and are vitally interested in it,
excited and challenged by it, then you will exert maximum energy. But in the
excitement, the pain of fatigue dissipates, and the exuberance of what you hope
to achieve overcomes the weariness.” Our research showed that Multipliers
make challenges both provocative and plausible, attracting others to join them
and offer their full capability, both intellectually and emotionally. Their
approach generates the collective will and stretch needed to undertake the most
paramount of challenges.
Our research has shown that when people work for Diminishers, they give
only half of their capability, yet they consistently report the experience to be
“exhausting.” In contrast, under the leadership of Multipliers, people are able to
give their all—100 percent even—and describe the experience as “a bit
exhausting but totally exhilarating!” Isn’t it interesting that giving half our
capability is exhausting, but giving our all is exhilarating? We often think
burnout is a result of working too hard; more often burnout occurs when people
are merely doing more of the same or when they can’t see the results of their
hard work. Good leaders don’t just give people more work, they give them
harder work—a bigger challenge that prompts deep learning and growth.
When leaders operate as challengers—telling less and asking more—they get
contributions from their people that far surpass what they thought they had to

give and it is this concomitant exhilaration that makes people sign up again and
again. Why? Because they have been offered a deeply challenging and
rewarding experience. Ask for more and you will get more. So will the people
who work for you.

Chapter Four Summary

The Know-It-All Versus the Challenger KNOW-ITALLS give directives that showcase how much they
know. As a result they limit what their organization
can achieve to what they themselves know how to do.
The organization uses its energy to deduce what the
boss thinks.
CHALLENGERS define opportunities that challenge people to go beyond what they

know how to do. As a result they get an organization that understands the
challenge and has the focus and energy to take it on.
The Three Practices of the Challenger 1. Seed the Opportunity • Show the
need
• Challenge the assumptions • Reframe problems
• Create a starting point 2. Lay Down a Challenge • Extend a concrete
challenge • Ask the hard questions
• Let others fill in the blanks 3. Generate Belief in What is Possible
• Helicopter down
• Cocreate the plan
• Orchestrate an early win Becoming a Challenger 1. Take the extreme
questions challenge 2. Create a stretch challenge 3. Take a bus trip
4. Take a massive baby step Leveraging Resources

Unexpected Findings 1. Even when leaders have a clear view of the future,
there are advantages to simply seeding opportunities.
2. Challengers have full range of motion: they can see and articulate the big
thinking and ask the big questions, but they can also connect that to the
specific steps needed to create movement.
3. If you ask people to take on the impossible in the right way, it can actually
create more safety than if you ask for something easier.

FIVE

The Debate Maker

It is better to debate a decision without settling it than settling a
decision without debating it.
JOSEPH JOUBERT

How leaders make decisions is profoundly influenced by how they engage and
leverage the resources around them. Our research has shown that Diminishers
tend to make decisions solo or within a small inner circle. As a result, they not
only underutilize the intelligence around them but also leave the organization
spinning instead of executing. Multipliers make decisions by first engaging
people in debate—not only to achieve sound decisions but also to develop
collective intelligence and to ready their organizations to execute. Jonathan
Akers illustrated the difference between the two approaches when he drove a
high-stakes decision at a multinational software company.
Jonathan Akers had recently landed a global role as vice president in corporate
planning and was eager to make an impact on the business. The company was
entangled in a competitive contest over ownership of the midmarket space. Their
largest competitor dominated the small business market, while they owned the
enterprise data space. In search of market control and revenue growth, this
company began moving downmarket while their competitor was moving up.
Winning the midmarket was symbolically important, but it would take an
entirely new business model to get there. Jonathan had been asked to lead the
development of a new pricing model to enable them to penetrate the market. It

was just the opportunity he needed to deliver a tangible success.
Eager to get it right on an issue of such strategic import, Jonathan assembled a
team with all the right players, including a broad coalition of leaders from
product, marketing, services, and business practices, many of whom had a deep
understanding of the midmarket space. The group came together in a large
conference room on the top floor of their sleek headquarters in Silicon Valley.
Jonathan sat at the head of a narrow table, the logical spot where everyone could
see him.
He began the conversation by laying out the challenge to the group, teeing up
the issues and turning on the heat for the work of the task force. He made it clear
that the CEO and the other top lieutenants of the company were expecting
significant progress in the midmarket. Driven by a high-stakes mandate, people
began compiling data and analysis and submitting it to Jonathan over the course
of several weeks. From Jonathan’s point of view, the task force was off to a
great start—people were energized and engaged.
The task force had just been set in motion, but already it was beginning to spin
with confusion. Jonathan had left unclear the role the task force members would
play and how the recommendations and decisions would actually get made.
Instead of using the brainpower inherent in the task force, Jonathan used the task
force to answer questions. While he thought he was providing much-needed
clarity, the participants felt they were merely an audience for his own ideas. He
consumed most of the time of the task force meetings over-articulating his own
biases or dropping names. Although he gathered data from each task force
member quite tenaciously, none of this information was shared or discussed in
the task force meetings. There was plenty of data gathered, but there was simply
no debate. The meetings atrophied into opinion-based conversation—mostly
Jonathan’s. One task force member shared his frustration: “I came to these
meetings hoping to hear from this brain trust we assembled, but all I heard was
Jonathan’s point of view.”
Although people were led to believe they would be a critical part of the
decision, they quickly realized that the task force wasn’t where the decision
would be made (or even recommended), nor was it a forum for debate where
their individual or collective thinking would be challenged. Their suspicions
turned out to be true. It appeared that the decision would be made by a select few

behind closed doors. Nothing much came of their work, but they did eventually
receive a sudden email from Jonathan with the subject line “Announcement of
New Pricing Model” and knew the decision had been made without them.
So, instead of generating collective understanding and optimism about the
midmarket, Jonathan generated disillusionment about the company’s prospects
for winning in this market, and he personally earned a reputation as a time
waster, because instead of energizing the team, he left them enervated. The
immediate impact was apparent the next time Jonathan called a task force
meeting: every other chair around the huge conference room table was empty.
But the more far-reaching result was that the company continued to stall in the
midmarket while their competitors gained traction and market share.
This story plays far and wide in legions of other top-floor conference rooms. It
is repeated because, while many leaders like Jonathan attempt the management
practice of inclusion and discussion, they are still operating with an elitist view
of intelligence, believing the brainpower for the organization sits with a select
few. They lack a rich view of intelligence in which there are many sources of
insight waiting to be more fully utilized and where intelligence develops through
engagement and challenge.
A leader’s ability to garner the full intelligence of the organization depends on
some of his or her most deeply held assumptions.

The Decision Maker Versus the Debate
Maker
Diminishers like Jonathan Akers seem to hold an assumption that there are only
a few people worth listening to. Sometimes they state that thought out loud, like
the executive who admitted to listening to only one or two people from his
4,000-person organization. But typically, such executives manifest their
assumption in more subtle ways. They ask their direct reports to interview
candidates for an open position, but they end up hiring the person their “star
employee” favors. They say they have an open-door policy, but seem to spend a
lot of time in closed-door meetings with one or two highly influential advisers.
They might patronize people by asking for their opinion, but when it comes
down to the high-stakes decisions, they make them privately and announce them

to the organization.
Multipliers hold a very different view. They don’t focus on what they know
but on how to know what others know. They operate on the assumption that with
enough good minds on it, we can figure it out. They are interested in every
relevant insight people can offer. Like the executive who, late at night, after a
twelve-hour debate, insisted the team listen to one more comment from a junior
member of the group. That comment turned out to be the crucial insight
necessary for solving the question at hand. It’s no surprise that Multipliers
approach decisions by bringing people together, discovering what they know,
and encouraging people to challenge and stretch each other’s thinking through
collective dialogue and debate.
These core assumptions lie at the heart of the differences in how Diminishers
and Multipliers make decisions. By assuming there are only a few people worth
listening to, Diminishers operate as Decision Makers: when the stakes are at
their highest, they rely on their own knowledge or an inner circle of people to
make the decision.
When Multipliers are faced with a high-stakes decision, they have a different
gravity pull toward the full brainpower of their organization. In harnessing this
knowledge, they play the role of the Debate Maker. They realize that not all
decisions need collective input and debate, but on decisions of consequence,
they lead rigorous debate that prosecutes the issues with hard facts and
depersonalizes decisions. Through debate, they challenge and stretch what
people know, thus making the organization smarter over time and creating the
organizational will to execute the decisions made.

The Decider Versus Civic Discourse
Examining the core decision-making approach of two public servants—one a
head of state and the other a head of a police force—reveals key differences in
their approach to making high-stakes decisions.
Our first example is President George W. Bush, who characterized himself as
“the decider.”1 And Time magazine2 described him as leading the “Blink
Presidency,” after Malcolm Gladwell’s book Blink about the phenomenon of
making instantaneous decisions.
In an interview with Washington Post writer Bob Woodward, President Bush

said, “I’m a gut player. I play by instincts. I don’t play by the book.” After
writing a four-book series on the president, which included eleven hours of
personal interviews with him, Woodward concluded, “I think [Bush] is
impatient. I think, my summation: He doesn’t like homework. And homework
means reading or getting briefed or having a debate. And part of the presidency,
part of governing, particularly in this area, is homework, homework,
homework.”
We saw the consequences of rapid, centralized decision making, which led the
United States into war with Iraq in 2003. Regarding the 2007 surge in Iraq,
President Bush asked tougher questions of his security team than he had with the
original invasion because “Different times call for different kinds of questions.”3
But as a matter of record, he kept himself away from some of the meetings
where key decisions about the surge were made, telling Woodward, “I’m not in
these meetings, you’ll be happy to hear, because [I’ve] got other things to do.”
Consider another public service leader, who approached vital decision making
by reaching deep into his constituent base. Arjan Mengerink is the District
Police Chief Eastern Netherlands in IJsselland, Nieuwleusen, Netherlands.
Before his career began, Arjan was a twenty-year-old “boy” with idealistic goals
of doing something for others and making a difference. After seven years as an
agent working on the streets, he was ready for the next step and signed up for a
three-year training at the police academy. From there he progressed to supervisor
and then to police chief at fifty-three years old.
As he advanced in his career, Mengerink was always aware of the importance
of cooperating with the officers in the force. He understood that the plans
devised and discussed in chambers affect colleagues who have to implement
them on the streets and with the general population.
Arjan had been through a failed reorganization. He said, “The plans were
brilliant, but they were conceived in a club and not discussed with the staff that
had to perform them. That resulted in so much resistance that we got stuck, and
we had to abandon our failed plan. That was a sour experience, but I learned
how I could have dealt with the situation better the next time.”
When Arjan was faced with another reorganization, he took a new approach,
leaning on others in the organization for help. As he planned the new
reorganization process, he invited the national police employee base to play a

major role. Focused on how he could engage employees in the process, he
organized sessions and invited one hundred employees from a cross-section of
the organization—from lawyer to secretary and police chief to agent—so that
everyone could contribute his or her own professional knowledge. During these
sessions, his team presented ideas on the reorganization process, and encouraged
the police employees to voice their agreement, shoot down, and debate, bringing
their different perspectives to the table.
By setting up debate sessions with a cross-section of the employee base, Arjan
found that their plans were better thought out, and also that the process ensured
that the people became co-owners. Rather than a plan being imposed on them,
the police employees cocreated it, refined it, and in the end believed in it. He
found that they also then conveyed their belief in the plan to others.
These two approaches capture the essence of the difference between Decision
Makers and Debate Makers. One makes fast decisions that leave others in the
dark, debating amongst themselves and trying to understand the rationale behind
the decision. The other leader facilitates a debate before deciding, and in the
process builds a team that can take intelligent action.

The Debate Maker
Lutz Ziob, the executive at Microsoft highlighted earlier, approaches decision
making in his organization with both the mind and the practices of a Debate
Maker. When Lutz took over the education business at Microsoft in 2003, it was
a traditional education business that delivered five-day instructor-led classes
through corporate training partners. But it was falling short of its goals for
revenue and reach.
Lutz faced a double whammy: the organization urgently needed to return to
positive and profitable revenue growth, and at the same time, it needed to greatly
extend its reach to ensure as many customers and potential customers as possible
had a command of Microsoft’s technology. As general manager of the Microsoft
Learning Business, Lutz needed to decide if they should look for this revenue
and reach within the current base of corporate training partners or if they should
pursue a bold—and potentially risky—new approach in the academic sector.
Lutz, who speaks with a softened German accent, has that rare combination of

passion and reserve. He is a veteran of the technology education business, with a
masterful command of both the strategy and the details of running his business.
His team is diverse, precisely because he has recruited them to be. Several are
longtime Microsoft staffers. Others have deep experience with education at other
global technology firms. Several are new to their current role, because they are
in stretch assignments outside their usual domain and functional expertise.
After fifteen minutes with Lutz, you can tell he is quite capable of making
these decisions himself based on his vast knowledge. And, given the stakes,
many executives would have felt the pull to do so. But Lutz has a bias for debate
and a conviction that the more vital the decision, the more rigorous and inclusive
the decision-making process should be. So he set out to engage his leadership
team with the challenge at hand.
He gathered his team and teed up the issue with big questions: Should they
refocus their entire business on the academic market, distributing education
through the schools instead of through corporate training providers? Should they
risk their current business model to potentially achieve significantly higher
reach? He gave the team their assignments. They would meet in a couple of
weeks on Orcas Island near Microsoft’s HQ in Redmond, Washington. They
were to bring all the information they could gather and come with views about
the academic market space.
Gathered on Orcas Island, the team had the usual off-site environment—a
great physical location, pens and flip charts, a big, open, light conference room
—but more important, they had been given permission to think! Because
everyone was prepared, Lutz could quickly frame the issue and launch right into
the challenge: “As you know, the entire $300 million education business we are
in has been based on a potentially outdated model. The decision we face is
whether to cling to this business model or introduce a totally new model that
would push the education out of the corporate classroom space and into
academics where we would reach students much earlier in their careers.”
He set broad parameters for the debates. He insisted, “I expect your best
thinking here. Everyone should feel not only welcome to speak up, but an
obligation to speak up. You can expect us to be thorough. We will be
prosecuting assumptions and asking ourselves the tough questions.” Then he
officially launched the first of several debates.

He sparked the debate through a series of bold questions: “Should we be in the
academic space?” and “What would success require?” After each question, he let
the team jump in and allowed free debate to proceed.
When the discussion was beginning to reach a settling point, he pushed
harder, asking people to switch sides and argue against their previously stated
position—“Chris, switch sides with Raza. Raza, you’ve been for this idea, you
now argue against it. Chris, you now argue for it.” They would switch roles,
which felt awkward for a moment or two, but soon they’d begin to pound the
issues from the other vantage point. Or, to broaden people’s perspectives, he
asked his people to assume roles outside of their functional area. Lutz persisted,
“Teresa, you’ve been offering an international perspective on this, now look at it
with a domestic hat on.” And “Lee Anne, you’ve been looking at the technical
issues. I want you to debate this from the marketing perspective.” The team
stepped away from their positions and a new set of sparks erupted. Lutz loved to
stir up controversy and would become noticeably disappointed if the debate
wasn’t charged and the sparks flying.
The team listened passionately to the rich and different perspectives. They
challenged one another’s assumptions and, often, their own. They happily
dropped the polite professionalism that typifies so many corporate meetings and
took on the challenges with an almost ferocious appetite. This was a high-stakes
approach to a high-stakes decision.
In the end, the organization decided that they would pursue the academic
market, and they spent the next two years repivoting the business around
students and academia. The business expanded their reach from 1,500 corporate
training partners to 4,700 academic partners—three times the scale—in just two
years. It is currently set to become the biggest reach driver of their nowprofitable business.
Lutz did not leave debate to chance. He knew that while creating a debate is
easy, creating a rigorous debate requires a deliberate approach.

The Three Practices of the Debate Maker
In our research we found that Multipliers did three specific things very
differently from Diminishers when it came to decision making. While

Diminishers raise issues, dominate discussions, and force decisions, Multipliers:
1) frame the issues; 2) spark the debate; and 3) drive sound decisions. Let us
examine each of these in more detail.

1. Frame the Issue
Our research has shown that the secret to a great decision is what the leader does
before the debate starts. They prepare the organization for discussion and debate
by forming the right questions and the right team. Then they frame the issues
and process in a way that everyone can contribute. In framing an issue, there are
four parts to a well-crafted frame:
THE QUESTION: What is the decision to be made? What are we choosing

between?
THE WHY: Why is this an important question to answer? Why does the

decision warrant collective input and debate? What happens if it is not
addressed?
THE WHO: Who will be involved in making the decision? Who will give
input?
THE HOW: How will the final decision be made? Will it be made by
majority rule? Consensus? Or will you (or someone else) make the final
decision after others provide input and recommendations?
A great debate begins with an important, provocative question—not just any
question but the right question. Tim Brown, chief executive and president of
IDEO, the famously innovative global design consultancy firm, said:
As leaders, probably the most important role we can play is asking the right
questions and focusing on the right problems. It’s very easy in business to
get sucked into being reactive to the problems and questions that are right
in front of you. It doesn’t matter how creative you are as a leader, it doesn’t
matter how good the answers you come up with. If you’re focusing on the
wrong questions, you’re not really providing the leadership you should.4
Tim Brown also went on to say, “The right questions aren’t just kind of lying

around on the ground to be picked up and asked.”5 The work of the Multiplier is
to find the right issue and formulate the right question, so others can find the
answers.
A common mistake is attempting to debate a topic rather than a question. The
most productive debates are in answer to a well-defined question, one with clear,
often mutually exclusive options. For example, a weak debate question is:
Where should we cut expenses? A stronger debate question would be: Should we
cut funding for project A or project B?
Once the issue is framed, the leader resists the temptation to jump in, where
there is fire for the deed, and begin the debate. Instead, they wisely give people
time to prepare and assemble their thinking, knowing the extra space will serve
to strengthen the thinking and remove emotion from the discussion. They not
only frame the issue but also delineate each person’s assignment. Often this
assignment includes coming with a clearly thought-through point of view and
evidence to support it. Interestingly enough, we find that teams come to the
soundest decisions when people come in having established a clear opening
position, rather than starting from a neutral position.
When Lutz Ziob engaged his team in the vital decision described above, he
clearly framed the issue: Should they refocus their entire business on the
academic market, distributing education through the schools instead of through
corporate training providers? He explained why this decision was vital to their
ability to expand their reach and educate as many potential users as possible. He
outlined the process and gave each member of his team two weeks to prepare,
asking them to come with a point of view and information to inform the
decision.
When a leader has framed the issues well, the rest of the team knows where to
focus. They know what’s in bounds, and they know what is out of bounds. This
framing operates much like the surgical drape used in most medical procedures.
Imagine you are sitting atop the gurney in pre-op while the nursing staff prepares
you for knee surgery. You are poked and prepped, checked and rechecked, and
handed numerous forms to sign. Then the nurse hands you a big, black Sharpie
marker and asks you to write NO on the wrong knee and YES just below the
knee to be operated on. While you might find this disconcerting at first, you
realize that you will soon be fully anesthetized and happily write your final

instruction to your surgeon. Once in the operating room, another nurse places a
thin, blue surgical drape over the designated knee, blocking off everything
except that knee, visible through the five-inch square opening in the middle of
the drape. The surgical team sees only an impersonal knee that needs a new
anterior cruciate ligament. Freed from distraction and contamination, the
surgical team is ready to work. When a leader has clearly framed an issue
(clarifying the question, rationale, and process) and allowed people to prepare,
the team is ready for debate.
When a decision is high-stakes, Debate Makers require everyone’s best
thinking. They know people will do their best thinking if the issues are framed
well and defined, and if the questions of the debate are clear. They know that the
debate will be richest if it is based in facts, not opinions, and that it takes
foresight to gather the right information.
Because they take time to prepare and frame the issue, Multipliers are able to
leverage more capability from their people than their Diminisher counterparts.
Multipliers ensure that people don’t waste their brainpower and enthusiasm
“spinning” on tangential issues. By framing the debate in terms of key questions
within a clear context, they are able to foster motivation and readiness and help
elicit 100 percent from their people. Multipliers love debate, and they debate
with a purpose. They know what they want out of the debate and what they want
out of the people involved. Multipliers aren’t just debaters; they are Debate
Makers.

2. Spark the Debate
After framing of the issue, Multipliers spark the debate. Through our research
and coaching work with executives, I have observed four elements of a great
debate. A great debate is:
ENGAGING: The question is compelling and important to everyone in

attendance.
COMPREHENSIVE: The right information is shared to generate a holistic

and collective understanding of the issues at hand.
FACT BASED: The debate is deeply rooted in fact, not opinion.

EDUCATIONAL: People leave the debate more focused on what they

learned than on who won or lost.
How do you lead this type of debate? There are two key elements that couple
and form the yin and the yang of great debate. The first is to create safety. The
second is to demand rigor. Multipliers do both.
The Yin: Create Safety for Best Thinking
How do Multipliers create a safe climate for people’s best thinking?
They do it by removing fear. They remove the factors that cause people to
doubt themselves or their ideas and the fear that causes people to hold back. One
senior manager we interviewed told us about his current boss, “Amit has strong
opinions but he lets the discussion happen before he expresses that opinion.”
And further, “You know where you stand with Amit. He maintains a balance of
respect but is also brutally honest if something doesn’t make sense. I’ve never
gotten into trouble telling my manager what I think.”
Another executive we’ve worked with knew that she had a reputation for
being smart and strong-willed, and that she could be intimidating. A direct report
has noticed a recent change in her: “When the group is debating an issue,
Jennifer makes it a point to hold her views until the end. She gives a chance for
each member of her executive team to express his or her views before she adds
her own.”
Multipliers create safety, but they also maintain pressure for a reality-based,
rigorous debate. Multipliers make sure everyone is wearing a seat belt because
they are about to put their foot on the accelerator.
The Yang: Demand Rigor
How do Multipliers demand rigor?
They ask the questions that challenge conventional thinking. They ask the
questions that unearth the assumptions that are holding the organization back.
They ask the questions that cause the team to think harder and to dig deeper.
They ask for evidence. According to one of his management team members, Jim
Barksdale, former CEO of Netscape, was well-known for saying, “If you don’t
have any facts, we’ll just use my opinion.” Debate Makers aren’t overly swayed
by opinion and emotional arguments; they continue to ask for evidence,

including evidence that might suggest new or alternative points of view.
When the senior management team of a European online distribution company
met to discuss whether to add a new feature to their online store, there was
strong support among the team for the idea. But the CEO wasn’t satisfied with
intuition and wanted to inject more rigor into their collective thinking. He asked
the senior executive team whether the new feature would actually drive higher
sales. At first there were opinions, but the CEO wanted data and wanted to know
what the facts proved. The executive team began to dig into the facts in a
summary analysis. Again the CEO dug deeper. He asked the group to go country
by country, poring over the data to look for an answer to the questions.
As one executive who was present said, “Nobody got away with their own
opinions.” The group wrestled with the issue until they finally concluded that
they didn’t have enough information yet to make a clear decision, and they
identified what additional data they needed. This company’s leader kept the
debate going by demanding rigor and sound decision making.
Sue Siegel, when she was president of Affymetrix, led the company through a
moment-of-truth decision in 2001 by using the power of facts and openness to
harness the full brainpower of the organization.
Affymetrix produced microarray technologies that allow scientists to analyze
complex genetic information. The company had been public for three years and
had grown steadily to 800 employees. Sue received some troubling news from
customers that there were some problems with the GeneChip microarrays that
could potentially render inaccurate results, but only for a minor portion of its
applications. As president, she would have to make one of the toughest decisions
that the company would face in the next several years: should they recall the
product?
Sue was a veteran executive in the life-sciences industry and had deep
knowledge of the underlying technology and issues. But instead of relying solely
on her own understanding of the situation, she went beyond the management
hierarchy and reached deep into the organization for data and for insight. She
went straight to the people who understood the issues and let them know she
needed their input.
She then convened a larger forum of several layers and management. She
framed the magnitude of the issue and the potential impact to the company.

Product development cycles in biotech tend to be long, and fixes can’t be made
overnight. For a young company, this was a decision with far-reaching
consequences, and the answer was far from clear. Either way, they would live
with the consequences for years to come. She laid out a couple of scenarios and
then began asking questions, ensuring that the group thought through the
decision from every angle: “What is the impact for our customers? . . . What is
our legal obligation? . . . What is the financial impact?” Sue asked for data and
recommendations. The group debated for two arduous days, then Sue asked the
management team to weigh in, and then they made the decision to recall the
product. The next day, she boarded a plane to present at the Goldman Sachs
financial conference in Laguna Niguel, California, attended by more than a
thousand analysts, shareholders, and industry experts, to tell them about their
mistake and their decision.
The product recall was a financial setback for the young organization,
adversely impacting market cap for two quarters and sending it from Wall Street
darling to leper overnight. However, with the company staff behind the decision,
they were able to execute the decision with conviction and explain it to their
customers and to the market. This allowed them to rebound quickly to regain
their market position and exceed their market cap. In fact, the product recall
became a turning point in building deep customer relationships and respect for
employee input that would become the hallmark of the company. In the four
years that Sue led the company following the product recall, Affymetrix
continued to grow sales and beat expectations for both revenue and earnings.
Sue Siegel led this organization successfully through one of its toughest
decisions, because instead of turning inward, she reached out and utilized the full
intelligence of the organization to make a decision that was grounded in full
disclosure and fact, and in the best interest of their customers.
Debate Makers pursue all sides of the issue. When the group moves too
quickly toward agreement, Multipliers often step back and ask someone to argue
the other point of view. Or they might make the argument themselves. They
make sure all the rocks are turned over. Recall how Lutz Ziob sparked rigorous
thinking during debate. After early consensus began to form, he would jump
back in to stir things up, creating new bits of unresolved controversy. Next came
“the switch.” After asking people to come prepared with an opening position, he

asked them to drop their position and argue from the exact opposite point of
view. Imagine the effect this has on a team. By arguing from the opposite, or a
different point of view, the individuals 1) see the issues from another person’s
perspective, developing deeper empathy and understanding, 2) have to argue
against themselves, surfacing the problems and pitfalls in their opening position,
3) find new alternatives that elicit the best ideas from the competing options, and
4) separate themselves from a position. When the final decision is reached, it no
longer has an owner or advocate. The group owns the final position.
The following chart summarizes some of the practices Debate Makers use to
create safety while also demanding rigor:
Create Safety for Best Thinking
(The Yin)
• Share their view last after hearing
other people’s views

Demand Rigor
(The Yang)
• Ask the hard questions

• Encourage others to take an
opposing stand

• Challenge the underlying
assumptions

• Encourage all points of view

• Look for evidence in the data

• Focus on the facts

• Look at the issue from multiple
perspectives

• Depersonalize the issues and keep it • Attack the issues, not the people
unemotional
• Look beyond organizational
hierarchy and job titles

• Ask “why” repeatedly until the root
cause is unearthed
• Equally debate both sides of the
issue

3. Drive a Sound Decision

Multipliers may relish a great debate, but they pursue debate with a clear end: a
sound decision. They ensure this in three ways. First, they reclarify the decisionmaking process. Second, they make the decision or explicitly delegate it to
someone else to decide. And third, they communicate the decision and the
rationale behind it.
Reclarify the Decision-Making Process
After the issue has been debated, Multipliers let people know the next step in
the decision-making process. They summarize the key ideas and outcomes of the
debate, and they let people know what to expect next. They address such
questions as:
Are we making the decision right now or do we need more information?
Is this a team decision or will the leader make the final call?
If it is a team decision, how will we resolve any differing views?
Has anything that has surfaced in the debate altered the decision-making
process?
One executive we studied was strong on closure: “Allison says who is going
to make the decision and when. People aren’t left in limbo wondering how the
decision will be made.”
Multipliers let people know what will be done with their thinking and their
work. With this sense of closure, people around them are assured that their
discretionary effort won’t be wasted, and they are likely to give 100 percent the
next time. In this way Multipliers get full contribution not just once but over and
over again.
Make the Decision
Although Multipliers know how to generate and leverage collective thinking,
they are not necessarily consensus-oriented leaders. At times, they may seek the
full consensus of the group; however, our research shows that they are equally
comfortable making the final decision.
One manager responsible for emerging markets within a global technology
firm said of her leader, “Chris prefers collective decisions and consensus, but
he’s practical and he’ll either make the final decision for speed or defer to

someone else because it is clearly within that person’s domain.”
Communicate the Decision and Rationale
One of the benefits of purposeful, rigorous debate is the business case and
momentum it builds to execute the decision. As people debate an issue
thoroughly, they develop a deep understanding of the underlying problems and
opportunities and the imperatives for change. They put their fingerprint on the
decision. Because they achieved a collective understanding, they are capable of
executing collectively.
Lutz often held his organization’s debates in a conference room they came to
call the Theater. The Theater looked like any other conference room, with a large
table that the key players sat at during the debates. However, the room had twice
as many chairs set up around the perimeter of the room, because these debates
were open to anyone in the organization. Anyone interested in the issue could
come and listen. The team called it the Theater because it was like a surgical
theater in a teaching hospital. As people watched these debates, they came to a
better understanding of the issues. When decisions were reached, there were
people at all levels of the organization ready to execute. With this model of
transparent decision making, communicating the decision and the rationale is
easy because the organization is already prepared to move forward.
The Theater not only helped employees in this organization understand and
prepare to execute the decision at hand; like medical students learning to
perform surgery, they were also learning what was expected of them when they
were called to the table to a debate on another issue.

The Diminisher’s Approach to Debate
Instead of looking out broadly into their organization for intelligence,
Diminishers tend to make decisions quickly, either based solely on their own
opinions or with input from a close inner circle. Then people begin to spin and
speculate and get distracted from enthusiastically carrying the decisions out.
In sharp contrast to the Theater of the executive above, one Diminisher I
worked with held meetings in his office in a two-circle format. Seated at a small,
round table was his equally small inner circle, who would discuss the issue and

make the decisions. But around the perimeter of the room was a collection of
silent people standing and taking notes. After participating in this strange
meeting format, I couldn’t help but ask one of these voiceless individuals
standing on the outer edge about the role of this silent body. She said, “Oh, we
don’t ever participate in these decisions and we certainly don’t get a ‘seat at the
table.’ We’re just here to take notes so our SVP doesn’t have to tell us what to
do later.” This was less of a surgical theater and more of a lecture auditorium.
Instead of framing issues for debate and decisions, Diminishers tend to raise
issues abruptly, then dominate the discussion before forcing a decision.
RAISE ISSUES. When a problem surfaces, Diminishers bring issues or decisions to

people’s attention, but they don’t necessarily frame them in a way that allows
others to easily contribute. When they raise the issue, they focus on the “what”
rather than on the “how” or the “why” of a decision. One CIO routinely raised a
variety of distracting issues at his weekly staff meetings. One of his directors
explained, “Once he came in and raised the issue of ergonomically sound
keyboards and then went on about them for an hour. He is intense and
intelligent, but all over the place. He makes a millimeter of progress in a million
directions.”
DOMINATE THE DISCUSSION. When issues get discussed or debated, Diminishers

tend to dominate the discussion with their own ideas. They are debaters, not
Debate Makers. Looking back at Jonathan Akers, where did he fall short? He
gathered the right players and he gathered the data. But he never sparked a
debate. Instead he dominated the discussions with his opinions and shut down
the intelligence—and drive—of the players he had assembled.
FORCE THE DECISION. Rather than driving a sound decision, Diminishers tend to

force a decision, either by relying heavily on their own opinion or by
shortcutting rigorous debate. As one executive said in an attempt to drive closure
after dominating the discussion during a task force meeting, “I think we’re all in
agreement that we should centralize this function on a global level.” The group
looked bewildered, knowing that this was not the shared opinion of the group.
One brave woman broke the silence and responded with, “No, Joe, we have
heard your opinion, but we don’t have agreement.”

What is the impact to the organization of the Diminisher’s approach to
decision making? At first glance, it appears that Diminishers make efficient
decisions. However, because their approach only utilizes the intelligence of a
small number of people and ignores the rigor of debate, the broader organization
is left in the dark, not understanding the decision or the assumptions and facts
upon which it is based. Lacking clarity, people turn to debating the soundness of
a decision—“spinning” it rather than executing it.
This spin phenomenon is one of the reasons Diminishers create resource drain
rather than resource leverage. Decision Makers don’t use the full complement of
talent, intelligence, and information available to them. This capacity sits idle in
their organization. To counteract this, they continue to ask for more resources,
wondering why they aren’t more productive.
By contrast, Multipliers not only engage the best thinking of the resources
around them; they use debate to stretch the thinking of the individuals and the
team. While decisions are debated vigorously, real facts and issues surface,
forcing people to listen and learn. As a result, Multipliers get full capability out
of their current resources and they stretch and increase the capacity of the
organization to take on the next challenge.

Becoming a Debate Maker
What drives a Debate Maker? How does someone learn to lead debate like
Lutz at Microsoft Learning or Sue Siegel at Affymetrix? And how does someone
go from being a Decision Maker to a Debate Maker?
Our research and experience coaching executives reveals that leaders can
move along the Diminisher–Multiplier continuum. But it requires more than just
adding some new leadership practices. It often requires a fundamental shift in
the assumptions of the leader. Often this shift happens when a leader begins to
view his or her role differently. It can happen when leaders see that their greatest
contribution lies in asking the questions that produce the most rigorous thinking
and answers.
Several years ago I volunteered to be a discussion leader for a Junior Great
Books program at an elementary school. It seemed like a simple volunteer job.
The assignment was straightforward: lead a discussion of a group of third-grade

students on a piece of great youth literature. The goal was clear: have them dig
deep into the story for meaning and debate it with their peers. Despite my
protesting that I knew how to facilitate discussion, I was sent to a one-day
training workshop to learn a technique called “shared inquiry.”6 What I found
was a simple but powerful technique for leading debate.
There are three rules in shared inquiry:
1. THE DISCUSSION LEADER only asks questions. This means that the leader

isn’t allowed to answer his or her questions or give his or her
interpretation of the story’s meaning. This keeps the students from
relying on the leader’s answers.
2. THE STUDENTS must supply evidence to support their theories. If the
student thinks that Jack went up the beanstalk a third time to prove his
invincibility, he or she is required to identify a passage (or more than
one) in the text that supports this idea.
3. EVERYONE participates. The role of the leader is to make sure everyone
gets airtime. Often the leader needs to restrain stronger voices and
proactively call on the more timid voices.
As discussion leader, it was liberating to ask the questions but not give the
answers. In fact, I found it strangely powerful. And when the students spouted
off their views and interpretations of the story, it was thrilling to look them
straight in the eye and say, “Do you have any evidence to support that claim?”
Initially, they looked terrified. But they quickly learned that the cost of an
opinion was evidence. As they gained experience, they learned to respond
quickly. They would assert an opinion, and then I would insist (with my best
intimidating look), “Show me your evidence.” They would scurry to locate the
exact place in the text that supported their claim and cite it with conviction. And
because everyone was called on, every student learned to state their views and
support their ideas with data.
This experience cemented my belief that there is a process and a formula for
great debate.

The Starting Block

MAKE A DEBATE. Identify an important decision that would best be made
with rigorous thinking and collective intelligence. Frame the issue, prepare the
team, and lead the debate . . . not with forceful ideas, but with a sound process
that encourages people to weigh in before having to buy in.
Try debating like a third-grade student with these three requests:
1. ASK THE HARD QUESTION. Ask the question that will get at the core of the

issue and the decision. Ask the question that will confront underlying
assumptions. Pose the question to your team and then stop. Instead of
following up with your views, ask for theirs.
2. ASK FOR EVIDENCE. When someone offers an opinion, don’t let it rest on
anecdote. Ask for the evidence. Look for more than one data point. Ask
them to identify a cluster of data or a trend. Make it a norm so people
come into debates armed with the data—an entire box if necessary.
3. ASK EVERYONE. Reach beyond the dominant voices to gather in and hear
all views and all data. You might find that the softer voices belong to the
analytical minds who are often most familiar with and objective about
the data. You may not need to literally ask everyone, but be sure to ask
enough people to invite diverse thinking.
To drive further rigor into the conversation, you might try a fourth ask:
4. ASK PEOPLE TO SWITCH POSITIONS. Invite people to consider the issue

from another point of view. It will reduce personal attachment and
increase collective ownership.
As you rethink your role as a leader, you will come to see that your greatest
contribution might depend on your ability to ask the right question, not have the
right answer. You will see that all great thinking starts with a provocative
question and a rich debate, whether it is in the mind of one person or an entire
community.

Discussion, Dissent, and Debate
Hubert H. Humphrey, America’s vice president under Lyndon B. Johnson,

captured the essential principle of how Multipliers make decisions when he said:
“Freedom is hammered out on the anvil of discussion, dissent, and debate.” Our
research showed that it is this discussion, dissent, and debate that also hammer
out sound decisions.
When leaders play the role of decision maker, they not only carry the burden
of making the right decision, they also are left to carry it through to completion.
With only a select few understanding the real issues, this can be a heavy burden.
But when a leader engages the team in making the most vital of decisions, they
distribute this load. Informed by collective intelligence, better, more thoughtful
decisions are made. Having thought through and fought through the issues, the
team builds strength and puts their full weight behind the decisions. Through
discussion, dissent, and debate they’ve generated collective willpower and the
commitment to see this decision through, solving the intended problems with
precision and potency. As Margaret Mead famously said, “Never doubt that a
small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it’s
the only thing that ever has.”
Too many leaders exhaust themselves trying to garner buy-in across the
myriad of stakeholders in their community. Instead of building support, their
work often builds resentment as people reluctantly surrender to the inevitable.
Reverse this cycle by investing your energy up front. Let people weigh in, and
they will give you their buy-in.

Chapter Five Summary

The Decision Maker Versus the Debate Maker
DECISION MAKERS decide efficiently with a small
inner circle, but they leave the broader organization
in the dark to debate the soundness of the decision
instead of executing it.
DEBATE MAKERS engage people in debating the issues up front, which leads to

sound decisions that people understand and can execute efficiently.
The Three Practices of the Debate Maker 1. Frame the Issue • Define the
question
• Form the team
• Assemble the data
• Frame the decision
2. Spark the Debate • Create safety for best thinking • Demand rigor
3. Drive a Sound Decision • Reclarify the decision-making process • Make
the decision
• Communicate the decision and rationale Becoming a Debate Maker
Make a debate with four asks: 1) Ask the hard question, 2) ask for
evidence, 3) ask everyone, 4) ask people to switch.
Leveraging Resources

Unexpected Findings 1. As a leader, you can have a very strong opinion but
also facilitate debate that creates room for other people’s views. Data is the
key.
2. Debate Makers are equally comfortable being the decision maker in the
end. They are not only consensus-driven leaders.
3. Rigorous debate doesn’t break down a team; it builds the team and makes
it stronger.

SIX

The Investor

If you want to build a ship, don’t drum up the men to gather wood,
divide the work and give orders. Instead, teach them to yearn for the
vast and endless sea.
ANTOINE DE SAINT-EXUPÉRY

It is after midnight at the McKinsey office in Seoul, South Korea. The lights are
out, except in one conference room occupied by a project team that is two days
away from a critical presentation to one of the firm’s biggest clients in Asia. The
team is led by Hyunjee, a sharp, highly regarded project leader. Joining them this
night is Jae Choi, one of McKinsey’s partners based in Seoul. Jae knows the
team has a critical deadline and, as is typical, is meeting with the team to guide,
challenge, and shape the thinking as they build the first major presentation of
their findings to the client.
The project leader, Hyunjee, is at the whiteboard. She and the team are
retesting the storyline with some new facts that surfaced during the past week.
The team is struggling to integrate the findings into the overarching message
about the client’s business transformation. Jae listens carefully and asks a lot of
questions, as he is known for doing.
It becomes clear that the team is stuck. The team leader is systematically
working this tough problem but looks at Jae with a look that signals I could use a
little help here! Jae has been on countless numbers of these projects and has
stood in the project leader’s shoes many times. He can see a storyline that the

team, who has been buried in the details, has not yet considered.
Jae offers a few thoughts for the team to discuss, standing up to take the
whiteboard marker from the team leader. Heading to the board, he begins to list
several emerging themes, encouraging the team to view the facts from a different
angle. The group is thrilled to have the fresh perspective, and excited voices are
now engaged in testing, pushing, and building on the ideas despite the late hour.
With new insights coming from the renewed discussions, Jae can now visualize
the new presentation flow in his mind. He feels a familiar comfort up at the
whiteboard. The desire to drive the team toward completion is alluring. He is
tempted to lay it all out for the team so they can all go home and get some rest.
The consultant in Jae tells him to go on and finish the job and complete the
storyline himself. But the leader in Jae signals restraint. He stops sketching and
turns to the project leader, checking to see if she is comfortable with the new
direction. Seeing the smile on her face, Jae says, “Okay . . . looks like we’ve got
a new line of thinking to run with. Let’s see what you can do with this.” He then
hands the pen back to Hyunjee, who resumes command of the process and leads
the team to build an outstanding presentation for the client.
Surely it was tempting for Jae to jump in, rescue the struggling team, and
drive the presentation to completion himself. He would have felt like a hero (and
probably a few years younger, too). And it was tempting for the team to let him
do it, given the late hour. But Jae’s proclivity to invest in people and their
development won out. Jae reflected on the leader’s role: “You can jump in and
teach and coach, but then you have to give the pen back. When you give that pen
back, your people know they are still in charge.”
When something is off the rails, do you take over or do you invest? When you
take the pen to add your ideas, do you give it back? Or does it stay in your
pocket?
Multipliers invest in the success of others. They may jump in to teach and
share their ideas, but they always return to accountability.
When leaders fail to return ownership, they create dependent organizations.
This is the way of the Diminisher. They jump in, save the day, and deliver
results through their personal involvement. When leaders return the pen, they
cement accountability for action where it should be. This creates organizations
that are free from the nagging need of the leader’s rescue.

Multipliers enable others to operate independently by giving other people
ownership of results and investing in their success. Multipliers can’t always be
present to perform emergency rescues, so they ensure that people on their teams
are self-sufficient and can operate without their direct presence.
Thus far the book has explored why Multipliers make people smarter and
more capable in their presence. Now I ask you to consider a different question:
What happens when the Multiplier isn’t there? What happens to people when the
sunlight of the Multiplier isn’t shining in their part of the world?
This chapter addresses this most curious question: How do Multipliers create
organizations that act intelligently and achieve results without their direct
involvement?

The Micromanager Versus the Investor
Multipliers operate as Investors. They invest by infusing others with the
resources and ownership they need to produce results independent of the leader.
It isn’t just benevolence. They invest, and they expect results.

Forever Strong
Larry Gelwix stood on the side of the rugby pitch, watching his high school team
practice. He thought back to the first team he had coached to the national
championships. He remembered them being up before dawn, training together.
Larry said under his breath, “Well, that was then.”
The team in front of him was good, to be sure. They were learning the game,
but he noticed they didn’t have the physical stamina of previous teams. Larry felt
stuck. It wasn’t like he hadn’t tried. He reminded them at practice all the time.
They would nod their heads, but then they didn’t do it.
He could cancel practices and hold fitness training in its place, but that put the
skill level of the team at risk. He could yell at them, but that would only work
for a day or two. Larry leaned over to an associate coach and said, “We need to
turn this over to the captains!”
The next day, Larry stood up, walked quickly to the chalkboard, and drew a
line from one side of the board to the other. He said, “We have six weeks left
until the finals, and it takes a pretty good athlete six or seven weeks to build the

endurance he needs.” The coaches and captains were listening to every word. He
continued, “If we figure this out now, we can win the nationals. If we can’t,
we’ll be running on empty.”
He gave them the low-down: “There are two options: the coaches can keep
trying to figure something out or you as the captains can take ownership for
finding a solution. What should we do?”
There was a pause. Then the captain of the backs said, “We’ll take it on.”
Larry said, “Right now I own this challenge. Once you take it on, you’ll own
it completely. We’ll expect an update from you two weeks from today, but we
won’t bug the team at all.”
There was silent agreement in the look that passed between the captains, then
the captain of the forwards stood up and went to the board. He turned to Larry,
who had sat down with the other coaches, and said, “Okay, we have a few
questions.” Larry and the coaches,stayed and answered questions about what
types of fitness training produced speed, agility, and endurance until eventually
the coaches were excused and the four captains, all in their teens, took a turn
figuring it out, standing in a semicircle around the chalkboard.
The solution they implemented was to divide the team into small groups of
four to six people, each with its own leader. The captains would keep the
subgroup leaders accountable, and the leaders would keep the players
accountable. The smaller groups met before or after school for fitness training
for weeks, and the team soon became one of the fittest in the thirty-four years
Larry had coached the team. They went undefeated all season and won the
national championship.
How would a micromanaging coach have approached the same problem? We
don’t need to wonder.

Calling Every Play
Marcus Dolan shouted across the school at John Kimball, “Get over here!”
Marcus was a muscle-head coach who wanted to micromanage every aspect of
his team. He yelled at one of his team captains, “Don’t ever hold a practice
without me or you’ll be off this team. You’ve probably already messed everyone
up.”
Not surprisingly, John didn’t try that again, and little by little, he and the other

players slowly stopped taking initiative entirely. Playing for Marcus meant you
did what he said without question. The endless laps at practice just had to be
done. Even in the games, he called every play for every player. The team was so
focused and dependent on Marcus, they couldn’t think intelligently or adapt
rapidly to changes on the field. They lost every game. Marcus took a group of
players that had begun with a sense of ownership for the team and
micromanaged it out of them. Interestingly, Sports Illustrated later elected
Marcus Dolan the most losing coach in high school sports history.
More interesting still, eight of his players eventually left the team and went to
play for Larry Gelwix. In fact, they were on the team described earlier that woke
before dawn to practice and the same team that led Highland to its first national
championship.

Running onto the Field
Why is it that when the stakes are high, many managers jump in and take over?
I’ve watched hundreds of youth soccer games, and I have to admit that I find
myself watching the coaches more than the players (one of the curses of genius
watching). I’ve seen a lot of very frustrated coaches during those games when
the team is down and playing horribly. I’ve seen crazy arm waving, copious
shouting, occasional tantrums on the sidelines. But I’ve never once seen a coach
run out onto the field, steal the ball away from a player, drive down the field,
and score. Yet each one of these coaches had the skills required to score the
game-winning goal. And I’m sure a few have been tempted to do it.
So why don’t they? Beyond the obvious reason that it is against the rules, it
simply isn’t their role. Their job is to coach, and their players’ job is to play.
What perhaps isn’t so obvious is why, when the stakes are high, many managers
in organizations don’t hesitate to run onto the playing field, steal away the ball,
and score the winning goal. Managers jump in because in their organization it
isn’t illegal, and many can’t resist the temptation. Consider two such examples
that occur every day in workplaces.
The sales manager who doesn’t see fast enough progress in winning an
important prospective client and jumps into the sales process, trying to
win the deal himself.

The marketing vice president who watches one of her people stumble as
he presents the new product go-to-market plan to the CEO. When the
CEO fires tough questions at him, the marketing VP leaps in and not
only answers the tough questions but finishes the presentation.
You might ask yourself: How would I coach if I could never step out on the
playing field? How would I lead if I couldn’t jump in and take over? How would
I respond to a performance gap if I were a Multiplier?
Multipliers understand that their role is to invest, to teach, and to coach, and
they keep the accountability for the play with the players. By doing so, they
create organizations that can win without them on the field.
Let’s now explore the discipline of the Investor and how Multipliers create
organizations that can perform and win, not only without them on the field but
long after their direct influence has ended.

The Investor
Ela Bhatt (known as Elaben) is a slight seventy-eight-year-old Indian woman,
soft-spoken to the point of seeming at first a bit fragile. She lives in the simplest
two-bedroom bungalow, with her bed doubling as a desk chair. She grew up
listening to her teachers speak of India’s struggle for independence and her
parents tell stories of her grandfather who joined the twenty-four-day Salt March
from Mohandas K. Gandhi’s ashram in Ahmedabad to the Arabian Sea to make
salt, in symbolic defiance of British law.
In order to gain firsthand experience of rural poverty, Elaben went to live in
the villages of India and saw for herself that the political independence gained
from British rule was not enough. Economic independence would be the next
victory. In the villages she saw both the vibrancy and the struggle of the selfemployed seamstresses, street vendors, and construction workers and in response
founded the Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA) in 1972, which
gradually became a significant union in the region.
It would have been easy for Elaben to be elected general secretary of SEWA
every three years, as dictated by law, forever. In this way she could have owned
the organization’s agenda indefinitely and just assigned tasks to everyone else.

SEWA, after all, was her creation. It had evolved slowly in her mind and it
would have been understandable, if not expected, for her to remain its formal
leader in perpetuity.
Yet Elaben insisted on turning over the responsibility of running SEWA to
new and younger leadership. She personally invested the time and energy into
educating members about the democratic process and encouraged everyone to
gain the political literacy needed to step up and run for one of the open positions.
In a fascinating embodiment of SEWA’s mission and management
philosophy, Jyoti Macwan, who enrolled as member of SEWA as a poor,
Guajarati-speaking, cigarette-rolling worker, went on to become the Englishspeaking general secretary for SEWA. In this role, she has led the union, which
at the most recent election involved 1.2 million people. Jyoti could have spent
her work years figuring out how to survive from day to day, but because of
Elaben’s leadership, she has used her intellect solving complex problems that
reach across international boundaries and affect more than 1 million women like
herself. She recently stood shoulder to shoulder with Elaben and US Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton as they answered questions at a press conference.
Jyoti’s story is just the beginning. If you look at the second generation of chief
executives of all the SEWA organizations, they all first worked under Elaben’s
tutelage. Each was given greater and greater ownership as they matured into
capable managers. Every time Elaben established an institution, she invested in
the future leaders and stepped away from the operational management. Each
time, the succession was handled so gracefully that she could leave with the
confidence that her presence would still be felt even when she is elsewhere,
investing her energy in establishing another institution. The SEWA union was
followed by a bank (created from four thousand women each depositing ten
rupees1), and this has been followed by the Gujarat Mahila Housing SEWA
Trust, the Gujarat State Mahila SEWA Cooperative Federation, SEWA
Insurance, SEWA Academy, Homenet South Asia, and many others.
Elaben continues to invest in building leaders and organizations so they can
operate independently of her. Her influence is like that of a parental figure or
wise elder who gives guidance when people ask for it, support when she is
needed. Her approach to management is the outgrowth of her simple motto: “A
leader is someone who helps others lead.” Today Elaben serves as a member of

The Elders, an international nongovernmental organization of public figures
noted as elder statesmen, peace activists, and human rights advocates, who were
brought together by Nelson Mandela in 2007.
How does a leader like Elaben create other leaders who can assume ownership
and deliver on the mission of the organization themselves? We find answers in
the three practices of the Investor.

The Three Practices of the Investor
As we studied the unique way Multipliers drive results, I found the practices
remarkably similar to another world I know—a world driven by intellectual
assets and investment multiples, where technology and business leaders develop
other leaders in search of growth and returns and the creation of wealth.
This is a world whose nerve center is just a mile from my house. On Sand Hill
Road in Menlo Park, California, home to Silicon Valley’s venture capital
community, multimillion-dollar investment decisions are made many times
daily. Venture capital firms scour industries looking to invest in emerging
technologies and young companies destined to become the industry leaders of
the future. When a venture firm places its bet and invests a round of funding, it
draws up a term sheet to govern the deal. Of particular interest to all parties is
the specification of ownership levels. These ownership levels outline relative
ownership for the business (post-investment) and dictate expectations for
leadership and for accountability. Simply put, the term sheet lets the parties
know who is in charge.
Once ownership of the new company is established, the venture firm cuts a
check and the investment of resources begins. This funding provides the
financial resources to secure capital, intellectual property, and the human
resources to fuel the business. But the value isn’t limited to the financial
resources. The real value often emerges from the insight and coaching the startup company receives from the senior partners at the venture firm—men and
women who have grown businesses, incubated technology, and often managed
very large companies themselves. They not only invest the capital of the fund,
they invest their know-how into these nascent companies. They coach the CEO,
they lend their Rolodex to assist with business development and sales, and they

work with the management team to ensure financial targets can be met.
After infusing capital and know-how, the venture partners look for expected
returns. The returns in the marketplace may be years away (or may never
materialize), but they watch for key milestones. The accountability is clear. If
the company produces expected results, a second or third round of funding is
likely. Otherwise the company is left to make it on its own or die on the vine.
Similarly, in their role as Investors, Multipliers define ownership up front and
let other people know what is within their charge and what they are expected to
build. They invest in the genius of others in a similar way. They teach and coach.
They back people up, infusing the resources they need to be successful and to be
independent.
And Multipliers complete the same investment cycle as they demand
accountability from others. They understand that this accountability isn’t
ruthless. It is the draw that creates such extraordinary growth of intelligence and
capability in others.
We’ll look at each of these three steps in turn: 1) defining ownership; 2)
investing resources; and 3) holding people accountable.

1. Defining Ownership
Investors begin this cycle by establishing ownership up front. They see
intelligence and capability in the people around them, and they put them in
charge.
Name the Lead
When John Chambers, then CEO of Cisco, hired his first vice president, Doug
Allred, into the company, he gave the new VP of customer support control and
made sure their respective roles were clear: “Doug, when it comes to how we
run this area of the company—you get 51 percent of the vote (and you’re 100
percent responsible for the result). Keep me in the loop, and consult with me as
you go.” Weeks later, when Doug was updating John on progress, John
responded with, “I knew you’d surprise me on the upside.” And it wasn’t just
Doug who received majority voting rights. John gives “51 percent of the vote” to
every member of his management in their respective areas of accountability.

If your boss had told you that you owned 51 percent of the vote, how would
you operate? Would you second-guess yourself and run all decisions by him? Or
would you swing in the opposite direction and make decisions without
consulting him? You probably would do neither. Most likely, you would consult
your boss on important decisions to get a second opinion, while for the smaller
stuff, you might be wise to ignore him or her as needed to get your job done.
Giving someone 51 percent of the vote and full ownership creates certainty
and builds confidence. It enables them to stop second-guessing and start getting
second opinions. Clarifying the role that you will play as a leader actually gives
people more ownership, not less. They then understand the nature of your
involvement and when and how you will invest in their success. Most important,
they understand that they hold the majority ownership position and that success
or failure hinges on their efforts.
Give Ownership for the End Goal
A management team is assembled for an off-site meeting to plan an important
acquisition for their business. They kick off their work with a simple but
powerful management exercise called the Big Picture.2 The team divides into
nine pairs, and each pair is given a one-inch square from a photo of a famous
modern painting. Each team is tasked with creating a reproduction and
enlargement of its piece of the picture. In other words, each team is given a little
piece of a bigger picture. The goal for the team is to bring all the enlargements
together to form a unified replica of the original painting. The result should be a
painting that is technically accurate and flows together seamlessly. The
challenge is that no pair has seen the “big picture.”
I hope you can visualize the scene. Each pair, energized by the challenge,
studies their one-inch square and begins to replicate it onto the large piece of
paper in front of them. They dive into the task, make sketches, and soon color
erupts everywhere. When the time allotted for the first phase of work expires,
they turn their attention to neighboring colleagues. They begin to connect the
pieces and notice that the painting isn’t coming together very well. The lines
don’t match up. The colors don’t blend. Their creation is like a Frankenpainting.
The session leader reminds them that their job is to optimize the whole, not

their individual piece. They start to pay attention to the bigger picture. They
rework their sections, focusing on integration and blending, although it is far too
late to create a seamless product. The team delivers the big picture, but it
remains a patchwork only moderately resembling the original artwork.
When people are given ownership for only a piece of something larger, they
tend to optimize that portion, limiting their thinking to this immediate domain.
When people are given ownership for the whole, they stretch their thinking and
challenge themselves to go beyond their scope.
Stretch the Role
We consistently find that Multipliers get twice the capability from their people
that Diminishers do. And time after time, people tell us that Multipliers got not
only 100 percent of their skills and know-how but 120 percent, or even more.
Multipliers do get more than 100 percent because people grow under the watch
of a Multiplier. One way that Multipliers incite this growth is by asking people
to stretch and do something they’ve never done before.
Consider these three individuals:
Eleanor Schaffner Mosh was a champion who needed a bigger cause. As the
marketing director for the small IT (information technology) practice within
Booz Allen Hamilton in 1988, she ran basic demand-generation programs. But
she suddenly found herself with a really big job when BAH decided to turn over
the reins of the IT practice to a different partner, who was intent on transforming
the function. Within months she was organizing a corporate-wide kickoff event
to launch the vision for the IT practice. Next she convened a forum of the top
CIOs in the world. When she found herself sitting next to the CEO of Booz
Allen Hamilton during one of the meetings, she confidently explained to him
why the IT industry and the IT practice inside their firm was going to change the
world. She later said, “I wasn’t afraid of anything or anyone. We knew what we
were doing and we felt like we could do anything.”
Mike Hagan was ready to take on the world, but he literally needed a passport.
He worked as the director of sales operations for the billion-dollar US sales
division of a multinational company. His job was to make sure the sales force
complied with company policy. When the president of the sales division wanted
to globalize and grow the business, he tapped Mike to figure this out. One day

Mike was the policy police, writing tickets for sales administration offenders.
The next day he was the architect of sales operations and policy for the entire
global business. Initially Mike protested, citing his inexperience with global
operations, and he confessed that he didn’t even have a current passport. His
protests were ignored. The president told him that he was smart and would
surely figure this out. And he did. The experience was grueling but invigorating.
Mike reflected, “I was given an opportunity to do something I had never done
before. In fact, no one had ever done it.” The job was huge, but Mike grew into
it as predicted.
Polly Sumner was a powerhouse waiting to be unleashed. When a new
president joined Oracle, he noticed this channel sales manager’s strategic savvy
and drive and asked her to assume a vice president role, running alliances and
strategic partnerships. In time, Polly was right in the middle of a very messy
high-stakes conflict. The management team could not agree on how quickly
Oracle would release new versions of its database code to its applications partner
(and competitor) SAP. Polly escalated the issue to her new boss, who responded,
“This is a complex issue, and probably beyond the scope of your role, but you
should be the one to lead the resolution.” Polly went right to the people who
could fix the problem. She found herself brokering a conversation between the
billionaire founders and CEOs, Hasso Plattner of SAP and Larry Ellison of
Oracle, in a meeting held at Larry’s favorite Japanese teahouse. The issue was
resolved to their mutual satisfaction and Polly was a superstar.
These three individuals all worked for the same boss, just in different settings.
Who was the common denominator in this equation? It was Ray Lane, known
for challenging his team and for exacting every ounce of their capability. When
we asked people why they gave Ray so much, their answers revealed a
consistent story: he asked them to go outside their comfort zones. He could spot
smarts in others and gave people a chance to stretch well beyond their current
capabilities. He gave them ownership, not at the level of their current capability,
but always one—and occasionally two—levels up.
When Investors stretch the role, they stretch the person in it. This bigger role
creates a vacuum that must be filled.

2. Investing Resources

The moment Investors establish an ownership position, they step in and begin
investing. They protect their investment by infusing the knowledge and
resources the person will need to successfully deliver on their accountability.
Teach and Coach
When Jae Choi at McKinsey inserted himself into the discussion with the
project team, it wasn’t to show-and-tell what he knows. He “grabbed the pen” so
he could teach and coach. It is a simple and vital distinction: Diminishers tell
you what they know; Multipliers help you learn what you need to know. Jae is
not only a business leader but also an avid teacher who looks for the teachable
moments when a team is spinning or has suffered a setback. That’s when minds
are most open and hungry, and he knows how to contribute a relevant insight or
ask just the right question to move the group forward.
K. R. Sridhar, CEO of Bloom Energy, who has been described several times
in previous chapters, is another masterful teacher. K. R.’s teaching doesn’t occur
in a classroom or in a corporate training center; he has to “coach” right in the
middle of a tough game and in the face of very real problems. When the team is
wrestling with a technical setback, K. R. engages not with a solution but with a
thought-provoking question. He’ll ask, “What do we know about what doesn’t
work?” and “What assumptions led us to these outcomes?” and “What risks do
we face now that need to be mitigated?” His team pursues these questions in
turn, unearthing their individual knowledge and building a collective body of
intelligence.
K. R. says, “You are teaching by helping your team solve real problems. Even
if you know the solution, you don’t offer it. If you do, you’ve lost the teaching
moment. It has to be Socratic. You ask the question and tease out the answer.”
Although K. R. focuses on immediate problems, his investment in these
teaching moments returns far more than just solutions to these problems. When
leaders teach, they invest in their people’s ability to solve and avoid problems in
the future. This is one of the most powerful ways that Multipliers build
intelligence around them.
Provide Backup
When you think of investing intellectual capital in your direct reports, it is
easy to assume that you are the one who needs to provide the capital. But this

limits the investment options to what you know and what you have time and
energy to invest. Additionally, when you are the sole investor, your presence can
be overpowering and your attempts to help can be more disruptive than
beneficial, especially when the stakes are high.
When people are stretched and working above their current capability level,
they are bound to trip up or take false steps. These situations are ripe for
Diminishers, especially well-meaning managers prone to rescuing struggling
employees. How can a manager intervene without usurping control? A wise
Multiplier ensures there’s a safety net in place—a planned backup, someone the
employee can go to for advice on how to recover gracefully. It should be no
surprise that the best safety nets are not managers; very few people enjoy falling
on their backs and getting rescued by their bosses. Typically, the best people to
provide this layer of support are colleagues who can offer guidance without
undertones of judgment and disappointment. Instead of jumping in, the Investor
provides a backup.
When leaders define clear ownership and invest in others, they have sown the
seeds of success and earned the right to hold people accountable.

3. Holding People Accountable
In working with hundreds of business executives, there is something I’ve noticed
about the finest of these leaders. They all appear to have slanted tables in their
offices. Sure, the desk they sit at (with their computer and phone) is perfectly
flat. But their meeting table has a distinct slant to it. Perhaps you may not have
noticed it, but surely you have seen how accountability for action rolls from their
side of the table down to other people—and often to you. It may look flat to the
unsuspecting eye, but if you placed a marble on one side, that marble would
surely roll right off the opposite end! These leaders have a natural leaning to
give accountability to others and keep it there. When their people push problems
over to the manager’s side of the table, by the end of the conversation, those
problems slide right back to where they came from. The leader helps, offers
suggestions, asks great questions, and may highlight or escalate a critical issue,
but the accountability slides back and rests with their staff. Their tables slant in
the direction of other people.

One senior executive I worked for carried a small leather notebook with him
in every meeting. Strangely, he never took meeting notes in it. But in every
meeting, he was mentally present and fully engaged, listened intently, and
offered carefully dispensed insight. During these meetings, I would furiously
take notes, making careful notation of my action items, and others did the same.
On rare occasions, I would see him write a single note. These occasions were
reserved for when he alone was accountable for an action. This was the slanted
desk in action. This leader knew how to keep the accountability with his people.
He was fully engaged, but he did not take over. And because he assumed
accountability with careful restraint, when he wrote an action down in his little
leather book, you could be sure it would get done, without delay.
Give It Back
Investors get involved in other people’s work, but they continually give back
leadership and accountability.
John Wookey is an executive vice president of industry applications at
Salesforce, a veteran in the applications software business, and a Multiplier who
builds organizations with know-how. He knows that delivering software on time
and with quality isn’t a hands-off job. But he sees a clear distinction between
micromanaging and being involved in the work people are doing.
One of the breeding grounds for micromanagement in the software
development business is the user interface review meeting. A typical software
application has about 250 screens whose usability can make or break the product
in the marketplace, so most executives are keenly interested in getting this right.
By the end of a user interface review meeting, the micromanaging development
executive will have seized the pen, sprung to the whiteboard, and redesigned the
screens himself in front of the group as an impressive show of his design savvy.
John has seen his former peers and bosses do this countless times, but he
makes the investment instead. When John sees problems in the screens, he
makes suggestions, discusses options and trade-offs, and then asks the team to
go back to their “lab” and figure it out. John says, “I give people feedback as
guidance rather than an order because I assume that someone who has been
working on something full-time, for many weeks, has insight into it that I won’t
have after a few minutes.” John does offer his insights, gained from decades of

building business applications, and reminds his team to think about what real
users need from the software. He keeps his guidance focused on what they all
can do to build a product they can take pride in.
John does jump in, but, like the partner at McKinsey in Seoul, he hands the
pen back. By doing so, he signals that he is interested and engaged, but not the
one in charge. He gives it back, and the accountability for designing and
building a great product stays with the other person, who incidentally is also
built up in the process.
Michael Clarke, the president of infrastructure at Flextronics, has a clever
little two-step process for giving accountability back to people in a way that
encourages their continued intellectual contribution. He listens to a presentation
or an idea with interest, and then with a wry smile and a thick Yorkshire accent,
says, “Hey, that is good thinking.” So he begins by praising the edge of great
thinking. Then he affirms their ownership of the business problem at hand by
saying, “I’d love to know whether we should invest in X or Y. I mean, you’re
smart. You can figure this out.” These words are heard again and again by his
team: “You’re smart. You figure it out.” Their ideas are validated and the onus
for solving the issue is back with them.
Expect Complete Work
It was the summer of 1987, and I had just landed the internship of my dreams.
I would be working for Kerry Patterson, a former professor of organizational
behavior at the business school that I attended, who was now running a
management training company in Southern California.
Kerry was known for his brilliant and slightly demented mind. Kerry is what
happens when you pack an Einstein-size brain into a Danny DeVito–size body.
Everyone wanted to work for Kerry, but I managed to get the job through some
combination of faculty recommendation and advanced Jedi mind tricks. I eagerly
drove to Southern California to work and study under his mentorship.
As in most internships, I did an assortment of odd jobs. I created training
content and did computer work and even handled a few stray legal issues. But
my favorite job was editing anything that Kerry wrote. Sometimes it was a
training manual, sometimes it was a speech, but my job was always to edit and
find and fix mistakes. On this particular day, I was editing a marketing brochure

that Kerry had written. I did the usual routine. I found and fixed typos and
grammar errors. I rewrote a few sentences that were awkward. Then I stumbled
on a particularly troublesome tangle of words. I tried a couple of times to rewrite
the sentences, but I couldn’t think of anything better than what Kerry had
written, and it was too big a mess for me to fix. I figured Kerry, with his great
big brain, would know best what to do, so I labeled it as awkward by noting the
standard editorial term, AWK, in the margin.
About an hour after I returned the document to Kerry’s desk, he returned from
a meeting to find my edits. I heard him marching down the hall toward my
office, and his pace indicated that he wasn’t coming to thank me. He burst across
the threshold and marched right up to my desk. Feeling somewhat worried, I sat
up straight getting ready for whatever Kerry was going to throw at me. Without
so much as a hello, he dropped the document in front of me with a dramatic
thump, looked me straight in the eye, and said, “Don’t ever give me an A-W-K
without an F-I-X!” With a twinkle in his eye, the consummate teacher turned and
left my office. Point taken. I worked a little harder, applied a little more
brainpower, and fixed the awkward sentences. I snuck back into Kerry’s office
and returned the new edit to his desk.
Kerry continued to teach and to write prolifically, and is the author of four
best-selling books (Crucial Conversations, Crucial Confrontations, Influencer,
and Change Anything). I completed the internship, finished business school, and
then made my way in the corporate world having learned from Kerry one of the
most important professional lessons: Never give someone an A-W-K without an
F-I-X. Don’t just identify the problem; find a solution.
Throughout my management career, I’ve told this story to dozens of people,
perhaps hundreds. I’ve shared it with virtually every person who worked on my
team and dropped a problem on my desk without an attached solution. I passed
along, “Don’t give me an A-W-K without an F-I-X!”
When we ask for the F-I-X, we give people an opportunity to complete their
thinking and their work. We encourage them to stretch and exercise intellectual
muscles that might otherwise atrophy in the presence of other smart, capable
people. Multipliers never do anything for their people that their people can do
for themselves.

Respect Natural Consequences
Several years ago, our family took a vacation to Maui, Hawaii. We parked
ourselves on the beach at the very end of Ka’anapali, at the base of Black Rock
point. It is a beautiful beach, but at that spot the ocean confronts the huge rock
jutting out of the beach, and the surf can be rough. My then three-year-old,
Christian, was fascinated by the ocean and kept straying out of the baby waves
and into the dangerous surf. The scene is familiar to every parent. He would
venture out too far, then I would go fetch him back, get down at eye level, and
tell him about the power of the ocean and why it was too dangerous for him to
go out so far. He would resume playing, forget my teaching, and venture out
again. We repeated the cycle several times.
I decided it was time for him to learn the lesson from Mother Nature instead
of from Mom. I watched for a midsize wave to come toward shore. I selected
one that would give him a good topple but wouldn’t sweep him off to Japan.
Instead of pulling him back in as the wave approached, I let him venture out.
And rather than grabbing his arm and lifting him out of the water, I simply stood
by his side. Several parents nearby looked alarmed as they saw the wave
coming. One tried to get my attention by giving me that “bad mother” look. I
assured him I was on duty but as more of a teacher than a lifeguard. The wave
came in and instantly dragged Christian under the surf and tossed him around
several times. After he’d had a good tumble, I pulled my toddler back up to
safety. Once he caught his breath and spit out the sand, we had a talk about the
power of the ocean. This time he seemed to understand, and now stayed closer to
shore. He continues to love the ocean, is an avid surfer, and displays a respect
for the power of nature.
Nature teaches best. When we let nature take its course and allow people to
experience the natural consequences of their actions, they learn most rapidly and
most profoundly. When we protect people from experiencing the natural
ramifications of their actions, we stunt their learning. Real intelligence gets
developed through experimentation and by trial and error.
Allowing consequences to have their effect allows natural forces to inform
intelligent action. It communicates that the manager believes people are smart
enough to figure things out. People become more independent because they feel
they own their actions, as well as the results or consequences of those actions.

Investors want their investments to be successful, but they know they can’t
intervene and alter natural market forces. By providing the possibility to fail,
these leaders give others the freedom and the motivation to grow and succeed.
Elaben Bhatt captured this well when she said, “There are risks in every action.
Every success has the seed of some failure.”
Multipliers have a core belief that people are smart and will figure things out.
So it makes sense that they operate as Investors, giving ownership that keeps
rolling back to other people. They invest the resources they need to grow a
business and the people in it. They engage personally, offering their insight and
guidance, but they remember to “give the pen back” when they are done so
people remain accountable to deliver on the expected returns.
Through investing in others, Multipliers generate independence in others.
They create organizations that can sustain performance without their direct
involvement. When the organization is truly autonomous, these leaders have
earned the right to step away. When they leave, they leave a legacy.

The Diminisher’s Approach to Execution
The Diminisher operates from a very different assumption: People will never be
able to figure it out without me. They believe if they don’t dive into the details
and follow up, other people won’t deliver. These assumptions breed dependency
among people, as full ownership is never offered to them. Diminishers assign
piecemeal tasks, then jump in, believing that other people cannot make it work
without them.
Unfortunately, in the end, these assumptions are often proven true because
people become disabled and dependent on the Diminisher for answers, for
approval, and to integrate the pieces together. When this happens, Diminishers
look outward, asking themselves only, Why are people always letting me down?
When Diminishers eventually leave an organization, things fall apart. Things
crumble because the leader has held the operation together with
micromanagement and sweat equity.
Consider the private equity investor in Brazil who stifled his entire
organization with his micromanagement. Celso is extraordinarily smart and
considered by his colleagues to be a financial genius. He was a superior analyst

and a rock star of a stock trader. But his control-freak management style
hampered his ability to build great companies. Unfortunately, as the head of a
private equity firm, his job was exactly that: to build companies.
In staff meetings, his staff rarely got through their reports on prospective
investments or portfolio companies before he interrupted with his pithy analysis.
Sure, he’d make a few great points, but it discouraged other people from
thinking. His signature remark was, “I can’t believe you haven’t figured this
out.”
Celso tracked performance of their portfolio companies with second-bysecond monitoring and arranged to receive all company sales reports on his cell
phone. When sales dipped off target, he’d call the CEO at random hours of the
night and start screaming. Whatever the situation, Celso was the first to respond.
Like Pavlov’s dog, there was no delay between stimulus and response. When he
found a problem, he’d jump in immediately and try to fix it himself.
Over time, Celso’s micromanagement created a sharp division inside the
organization. Most of his colleagues would lie low, knowing that he eventually
would do things himself. As much of the talent retreated, he compensated by
hiring aggressive graduates of elite colleges who didn’t have enough experience
to expect a different type of leadership. The organization began to look a lot like
Celso over time and resembled an alpha-male annual convention with a
revolving door. Like many Diminishers, Celso’s micromanagement stifled the
intelligence within an organization chock-full of really smart people.
Let’s look at the ways in which Diminishers cripple the capability of their
people and create dependent organizations.
MAINTAIN OWNERSHIP. The approach of the Micromanager is well captured in a

comment made by a staff member of a prominent professor: “I can’t make any
decisions. I don’t have lead in my pencil until Dr. Yang says that I do.”
Diminishers don’t trust others to figure it out for themselves, so they maintain
ownership. When they delegate, they dole out piecemeal tasks but not real
responsibility. They give people just a piece of the puzzle. It is no wonder that
people have a hard time putting the puzzle together without them.
Eva Wiesel is smart and energetic and, most unfortunately for her team,
decidedly a morning person. As operations manager in a manufacturing plant,

each day she’d come to work with a fresh set of ideas for her management team.
She would plan out the day on her commute in to work, arrive at the plant, walk
through the door, and begin dropping by her people’s office to let them know
exactly what she wanted them to do that day. Some days it was more of the
same, but other days the tasks took them in entirely new directions. Her people
noticed the pattern and began a simple coping routine. Every day about 8:00
a.m., they began lining up in the hallway that led from the lobby to their office
area. With pads of paper and coffee in hand, they waited for her to burst in and
deliver their “marching orders” for the day. It was just easier for everyone to
wait to be told what to do.
No doubt, Eva thought she was a great leader who was delegating and
communicating clearly to her team. In reality, Eva was a Micromanager who did
all the thinking for her team and hoarded the ownership of the work.
JUMP IN AND OUT. Micromanagers hand over work to others, but they take it back

the moment problems arise. They get lured in like a fish to the shiny objects on a
fisherman’s line. Emergent problems and big hurdles are irresistible bait for
Diminishers. They see these shiny objects and are attracted. They are fascinated
by the intellectual challenge to solve the problem. They are lured by the attention
and kudos they get for saving the day. And they’re hooked on the feeling of
importance as people become dependent on them and their brilliance to deliver
results. They love to be lured in, and the diminishing impact on their people is
set.
The problem is that they don’t just get lured in and stay there. They come in
and out. An issue gets onto the radar screen of senior management, and suddenly
they are all over it. They spring in and then when the fun is over, they spring
back out. They are bungee bosses.
Garth Yamamoto is the chief marketing officer for a consumer products
company. Garth has two modes: one is “all over it” and the other is “completely
absent.” When his team is working on an issue with CEO visibility, he jumps in,
takes over, and delivers the work straight to his boss, a highly mercurial leader.
When the CEO isn’t involved, Garth is nowhere to be seen. His people struggle
to get his attention on the less visible but equally critical projects that form the
backbone of the business.

When these leaders bungee in and out of their own organization, they create
dependency and disengagement. When they strike at random, they produce
disruptive chaos.
I was twenty-five years old and six months into my first
management job. It was 7:30 p.m., as I sat at my desk at 500 Oracle Parkway,
Oracle’s main office tower. The halls were dark and all my staff had gone home
for the night. Everyone was home but me. I was still busy, trying to close out my
“to dos” for the day, many of which had emerged during the course of the
workday as one little crisis after another landed on my desk. I came up from my
absorption in my work and thought, Why am I still doing so much of the work?
I’ve delegated. Why does it all come back to me? People were bringing me their
problems, and I would take them back.
At this realization, I became irritated at my team for dumping the problems on
me and for not doing their jobs. Then, alone in a dark office, I had the epiphany:
I wasn’t doing my job. As a manager, my job was no longer about me. It was my
responsibility to manage the work, not do the work. I had been solving problems
like some overzealous superhero, when I was really supposed to help other
people solve problems. My job was to flow the work to my team and keep it
there. It is an embarrassingly simple idea, but for me, as a newly promoted
manager, it was a startling realization.
In my executive coaching, I am frequently surprised at how many senior
leaders and even executives haven’t discovered this simple lesson. When
managers take it back, not only do they end up doing all the work but they rob
others of the opportunity to use and extend their own intelligence. They stunt the
growth of intelligence around them. They begin to slide down the slippery slope
of the Accidental Diminisher.
Whether accidental or not, Diminishers are costly to organizations. They
might be superstars themselves, but they quickly become the boundary factor
that limits the growth of their organizations. The cost of the Micromanager is
that organizations cannot grow beyond them and struggle to leverage the other
intellect inside the organization.
Micromanagers don’t use the full complement of talent, intelligence, and
resourcefulness available to them, so these capacities sit idle in their
TAKE IT BACK.

organizations. To counteract this, they continue to ask the organization for more
resources, wondering why people aren’t more productive and are always letting
them down.
In contrast to this, Investors not only engage people through clearly delegating
responsibilities to them, they extend assignments that stretch the thinking and
capability of the individuals and the team. They grow the assets in their
portfolio. As a result, they get full leverage out of their current resources and
they stretch and increase the capacity of the organization to take on the next
responsibility.

The Serial Multiplier
After seven hours of conversation in a studio apartment next to one of Mumbai’s
slums, Narayana Murthy and six of his friends agreed to a vision for a software
firm in Bangalore that they hoped would do two things. First, persuade their
wives to each contribute $250 as seed money. Second, garner respect around the
world. They accomplished both.
Their investment of intellectual energy and financial capital turned out to be
very sound, as Mr. Murthy led Infosys Technologies from its tiny beginnings to
become the first Indian company to be listed on the NASDAQ, with a valuation
of $10 billion. Murthy helped his team reach beyond their dreams, encouraged
India’s entrepreneurs to believe in themselves, and gave a face to the new India.
He became a revered name inside and outside the company (The Economist
ranked him among the ten most-admired global business leaders in 20053) and
could have easily stayed at the top and enjoyed the fame and power of his
exalted position.
Instead, on his sixtieth birthday, Narayana Murthy stepped aside as CEO. No
crisis triggered the move and there had been no power play to topple him. The
move was the extension of a deliberate plan. He had spent years investing in the
other cofounders so they could operate independently of him. Consistent with his
plan, he handed the role of CEO over to one of the other cofounders, Nandan
Nilekani, and Murthy stayed on as nonexecutive chairman and chief mentor of
the company, a role he has performed for ten years. Infosys has continued to
grow its market value—$32 billion as of November 2016.
Asked at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, why he chose

that role for himself, Murthy said his primary role as a leader was to ensure
successive generations of leaders. When asked what drives him to invest in this
way, he said, without hesitation, “The reward for winning a pinball game is to
get a chance to play the next one.” In other words, he doesn’t crave the spotlight
of being a CEO as much as he hungers to freely invest again elsewhere. While
some CEOs are addicted to praise, this leader is addicted to growing other
people. A Multiplier to his core, he recognized that his greatest value was not in
his intelligence but in how he invested his intelligence in others.
And now, in his second career, he has again been investing in the growth of
others, just with a much broader sphere of influence. Free from the operational
management responsibilities at Infosys, Murthy has gone on to invest in
governments and institutions around the world, including Thailand and the
United Nations, and educational entities like Cornell University, the Wharton
School of Business, and Singapore Management University. He has the ear of
the prime minister of India and is making a case to him to invest in the next
generation. In his words, “We have to put young people in charge of these
massive educational initiatives.” And his investor approach to management has
established a pattern at Infosys.
When leaders like Narayana Murthy invest in the development of other
leaders, they earn the right to step away without jeopardizing the performance of
the organization. The Investor not only reaps these rewards but is now available
to repeat the investment cycle elsewhere.
Much like a serial entrepreneur who builds one successful company after
another, these leaders can become Serial Multipliers. Of course, doing so
requires the leader to break free of the addiction to praise that entraps many
senior leaders and instead become addicted to growth—growth of the business
and growth of the people around them. Serial Multipliers grow intelligence. This
intelligence isn’t ephemeral, fleeing when the Multiplier is no longer by their
side. It is real, and it is sustainable, which is what allows the Multiplier to
replicate the effect again and again.

Becoming an Investor
To become a Serial Multiplier (or serial entrepreneur), you have to have a

starting point and a first success to begin the positively addictive cycle. Here are
four strategies for becoming an Investor.

The Starting Block
1. GIVE 51 PERCENT OF THE VOTE. When you delegate, you probably let people

know what you are expecting of them. Take this to the next level and let people
know that they (not you) are in charge and accountable. Tell them how you will
stay engaged and support them, but that they remain in charge. Give them a
number to make it concrete. For example, tell them they have 51 percent of the
vote and that you have only 49 percent. Or be bold and make it a 75/25 split.
Give them charge of something that requires them to stretch beyond their
current capabilities. Start with ownership for the current scope of their role, and
then take it up one level. Look for ways to uplevel their responsibility and give
them a job that they aren’t yet fully qualified for.
2. LET NATURE TAKE ITS COURSE. Nature is the most powerful teacher. We can

easily forget this when consequences are artificially imposed on us. But we
remember and learn deeply when we experience the natural consequences of our
actions. Letting nature teach is hard, because our managerial performance
instincts kick in. We want to ensure that our team delivers successfully. The
good news is that you don’t need to let a major project fail. Find the “smaller
waves” that will provide natural teaching moments, without catastrophic
outcomes. To let nature teach, try these steps:
1. LET IT HAPPEN. Don’t jump in and fix an assignment so it doesn’t fail.

Don’t take over a meeting because someone isn’t handling it well. Let
the person experience a degree of failure.
2. TALK ABOUT IT. Be available to help someone learn from the failure. Be
standing by after a failed meeting or lost sales deal to help them get up,
brush off the sand, and talk about what happened. Ask great questions
and avoid the ever-diminishing “I told you so.”
3. FOCUS ON NEXT TIME. Help them find a way to be successful next time.
Give them a way out and a path forward. If they’ve just botched an
important sales call, ask them how they’ll handle a similar situation with

another customer in their pipeline.
Not only are there natural consequences to our mistakes, there are natural
consequences to good decisions. Allow people to experience the full force of
their successes. Step out of the way, give them credit, and let them reap the full
benefits of their victories.
3. ASK FOR THE F-I-X. Many people are promoted into management positions

because they are natural problem solvers. So, when someone brings you a
problem, it is only natural for you to want to fix it. And chances are, people will
expect you to because you so often do. In that split second before you respond,
recall Kerry Patterson marching into the office of his intern and demanding she
do more than just point out awkward sentences. Ask for people to complete the
thought process and provide a fix. Use simple questions such as these:
What solution(s) do you see to this problem?
How would you propose we solve this?
What would you like to do to fix this?
Most important, don’t assume responsibility for fixing the problem. Put the
problem back on their desk and encourage them to stretch further. When
someone brings you an A-W-K, ask for an F-I-X.
4. GIVE IT BACK. When someone is stuck and asks you for your opinion, it can be

hard not to take over. For some, the tendency to take over is so great that they sit
on their hands, afraid to speak out lest it turn into a hostile takeover. When you
see your team members struggling, offer help, but have an exit plan. A
conversation can happen anywhere—in a conference room, one-on-one in your
office, during a spontaneous meeting in the hallway. Regardless of the venue,
visualize the point in the conversation when you symbolically give the pen back.
Imagine yourself at the whiteboard, adding a few ideas to the collective thinking
on the board. You finish your thought and then hand the pen back. This gesture
lets your colleagues know they are still in the lead and are accountable to finish
the job.
Here are some statements that signal that you are handing back the pen:

I’m happy to help think this through, but I’m still looking to you to lead
this going forward.
You are still the lead on this.
I’m here to back you up. What do you need from me as you lead this?
Each of the above is a simple entry point. But done repetitively these actions
can instigate the Multiplier effect inside your organization.

The Multiplier Effect
When Multipliers invest resources and confidence in other people and give them
the ownership of their success, they uncover the vast intelligence and capability
that lies within. Muhammad Yunus, 2006 Nobel laureate and father of the
microcredit movement, said, “Each person has tremendous potential. She or he
alone can influence the lives of others within the communities, nations, within
and beyond her or his own time.”
Multipliers invest in others in a way that builds independence to allow others
to apply their full intelligence to the work at hand, and also to expand their scope
and influence. The independence they create in others also allows the Investor to
reinvest over and over, becoming a Serial Multiplier. The math is simple but
powerful. The immediate Multiplier effect is that Multipliers get, on average,
twice the capability from someone they lead. When extrapolated across an
average organization of average size, approximately fifty people, that’s the
equivalent of adding an additional fifty people. Repeated over potentially ten
different leadership roles over the course of a career, that is an additional five
hundred people.
Multipliers continually double the size of their workforce for free. This 2×
return in perpetuity for leading like a Multiplier makes a compelling business
case, even to the most discerning investors on Sand Hill Road.

Chapter Six Summary

The Micromanager Versus the Investor
MICROMANAGERS manage every detail in a way that
creates dependence on the leader and their presence
for the organization to perform.
INVESTORS give other people the investment and ownership they need to produce

results independent of the leader.
The Three Practices of the Investor 1. Define Ownership • Name the lead
• Give ownership for the end goal • Stretch the role
2. Invest Resources • Teach and coach
• Provide backup
3. Hold People Accountable • Give it back
• Expect complete work • Respect natural consequences Becoming an
Investor 1. Give 51 percent of the vote 2. Let nature take its course
3. Ask for the F-I-X
4. Give it back
Leveraging Resources

Unexpected Findings 1. Multipliers do get involved in the operational details,
but they keep the ownership with other people.
2. Multipliers are rated 42 percent higher at delivering world-class results
than their Diminisher counterparts.4

SEVEN

The Accidental Diminisher

We judge others by their doings, but ourselves by our intentions.

EDWARD WIGGLESWORTH
While it may seem that the Diminishers described in previous chapters were
tyrannical bullies and know-it-alls, it turned out that they actually weren’t all
jerks, and some were really good people. While the narcissistic leaders grab the
headlines, the vast majority of diminishing happening inside our workplaces is
done by the Accidental Diminisher—managers with the best of intentions, good
people who think they are doing a good job leading.
How might we, with the very best intentions, be having a diminishing impact
on the people we lead? Can people be hindered by our honest attempts to help,
teach, or lead by example?
A high school was facing a critical application deadline that would determine
its ranking and status as a “blue ribbon” school, and the responsibility fell on
Sally, a veteran principal. She loved analytical work and was drawn to anything
that involved data, spreadsheets, and synthesis. She dove into the briefing
documents to get a thorough understanding of the analysis that would need to be
done. Realizing that the project was significant and needed a lot of further
analysis, she decided to get her assistant principal involved.
Marcus was relatively new to his role (and to spreadsheet work), but he was
smart, thorough, and insightful. She decided to hand the data analysis over to
him, giving him full ownership. Sally wanted him to be successful, so she
carefully planned the handoff. She met with him, reviewed the report

specifications with him, told him he would be in charge, and laid out clear
expectations for what needed to be done.
Sally then began working on other elements of the report and waited for
Marcus to send the data analysis to her. When he hadn’t sent it two days later,
she suspected he was struggling and wanted to help him, so she sent him more
instructions and suggested some categories to use for analyzing the data. Again,
she didn’t hear much from him. She stopped by his desk to see if he had finished
it. He hadn’t.
Knowing how conscientious Marcus was, Sally assumed he needed more help.
She sat down, offered her support, and asked, “How can I be of help to you with
this analysis?” When she didn’t get a concrete response, she began offering
suggestions. “Would it help if I gave you a quick tutorial on how to use the
statistics functions in Excel? Or perhaps we can sit down together and go
through the data elements?” Strangely, he didn’t bite at any of the offers.
Sally was growing frustrated. Clearly Marcus needed help, but she couldn’t
figure out how to help him. Sally was about to offer to do the first set of analysis
with him, but he started to speak before she could. Sally stopped talking and
gave him her full attention, thrilled to finally learn what help he needed from
her. He began tentatively, holding back how irritated he was by her deluge of
offers to help, but he grew more confident and finally was able to say, “Sally, I
think I could use . . . just a little less help from you.”
Sally sheepishly acknowledged his message, backed off, and gave him the
space he needed to figure it out on his own. He did figure it out, and the analysis
from this smart, conscientious assistant principal became a vital component of
the report that once again earned the school blue ribbon status.
Despite the best intentions, this leader had become an Accidental Diminisher.
While her intent was to help, her help was a hindrance. What happens when a
manager is too quick with ideas and too swift with action? Or too supportive and
helpful? Or just enthusiastic or optimistic? Surely these can be character virtues
—the kind taught in business school or Sunday school. Indeed they are, but
many popular management practices can lead us, subtly but surely, down the
slippery slope to becoming an Accidental Diminisher.

The Accidental Diminisher

We all have Accidental Diminisher moments. The secret to the Multiplier effect
is knowing what your vulnerabilities are, spotting them in action, and turning
these situations into Multiplier moments. Let me share a few of the ways that
really well-intentioned leaders end up having a diminishing impact on the people
around them. As you consider each, you might ask yourself, What is my
vulnerability? How might my best intentions be shutting down good ideas and
smart people?

Idea Guy
This type of leader is a creative, innovative thinker who loves an idea-rich
environment. He is a veritable fountain of ideas. Ideas bubble up for him 24/7,
so he bursts into the office brimming with new ideas to share with colleagues.
This leader doesn’t necessarily think his ideas are superior. He simply believes
that the more he tosses around his ideas, the more he will spark ideas in others.
But what actually happens around an Idea Guy? The ideas he tosses out seem
compelling, so his team begins to chase them. But as soon as they begin to make
progress on yesterday’s idea, the next day brings a new idea du jour. The team
makes ephemeral progress on multiple fronts. The great chase becomes a
standstill as they realize that they always end up back at square one—so why not
just stay there? As they learn to stop acting on the leader’s ideas, they also stop
trying to come up with their own ideas. After all, if they actually need a new
idea, they can just wait for the fountain to spew.
It is easy to get idea lazy around people who are idea rich.

Always On
This dynamic, charismatic leader exudes energy; he or she is always engaged,
always present, and always has something to say. These are the leaders with a
big personality that can fill a room. They assume that their energy is contagious,
like a virus to be caught by anyone in their presence.
But, like the common cold, this leader can be draining—she enervates rather
than energizes the people around her. As she expands, like a gas consuming all
the available oxygen, others suffocate; most find her just plain exhausting. Soon
people avoid making eye contact or having encounters with her, thinking, I just
don’t have the energy right now. And all too often around this leader, thinking

introverts are suppressed while action-oriented extroverts dominate.
We know what the Always On leader does to others—we’ve all seen it and
felt it—but what do others end up doing to this type of leader? Well, what do
you do to the human being who lacks an “off” switch? If you can’t find a
dimmer switch, you simply turn her off inside your head. You put her in the
background; she becomes white noise. Her endless spray of speech becomes
muffled and sometimes completely unheard by the people she leads. The Always
On leader thinks she is playing big, but actually she becomes small, and she
makes everyone around her small, too. Energy isn’t contagious, but attitude and
confidence in others are.
When the leader is always on, everyone else is always off.

Rescuer
He is a good manager and a decent person, the type of leader who doesn’t like to
see people struggle, make avoidable mistakes, or fail. At the first sign of distress,
he jumps in and helps. Occasionally, he swoops in with a big, heroic rescue.
More often than not, he simply lends a hand, resolves a problem, and helps
people across the finish line. Incidentally, we find that this is the most common
way leaders accidentally diminish.
The intention of the Rescuer is noble. He wants to see other people be
successful; he desires to protect the reputation of the people who work for him,
but because he interrupts a natural performance cycle, he starves people of the
vital learning they need to be successful. When a manager helps too soon and
too often, people around him become dependent and helpless. Instead of feeling
successful, employees experience frustration and depleted confidence when they
fail to cross the finish line.
Yes, there are times when employees appear to appreciate the help, yet the
behavior is nonetheless diminishing—while they may feel relief, they haven’t
grown or even fully utilized the intelligence they have. Furthermore, when the
Rescuer intervenes, he can create a vexing and all too pervasive performance
disconnect, by depriving people of the feedback that comes from the natural
consequences of mistakes. While the manager sees failure and a gap they have to
step in and close, employees often see success. You can hardly blame the
employees for this delusion; after all, their work always crosses the finish line on

time, because they are helped by the invisible hand of the Rescuer.
As leaders, sometimes we are most helpful when we don’t help.

Pacesetter
This is the achievement-oriented leader who leads by example. To build
momentum, she personally sets the standard for performance and for
exemplifying the values of the organization (such as quality, customer service,
innovation, etc.). She takes the lead, sets the pace, and expects that the people
around her will notice, follow, and, of course, catch up. For example, a manager
might wish to send a strong message that customer service is a top priority, so
she increases the time she spends in the field, traveling to customer sites,
meeting with key clients, and writing up and distributing trip reports. Her
intention is to send a signal that her organization should be actively listening for
the voice of the customer.
What actually happens when the leader speeds out ahead? Do others pick up
the pace or do they fall behind? The effect is subtle. The leader is half right:
people do take notice. They catch on, but they rarely catch up. Instead of
increasing their own pace, they most often assume the role of spectator,
watching the Pacesetter do her thing. While she is expecting her staff to speed
up, they are actually slowing down or sitting down. Instead of initiating
customer contact themselves, they assume this is an executive role and sit back
and read the reports. Or perhaps, recognizing the widening gap between the
Pacesetter and themselves, they simply give up.
I’ve seen this dynamic many times in the workplace but have learned it most
poignantly in a footrace against an eight-year-old. For most of his second-grade
year of school, my son Joshua insisted we race to the bus stop each day. Like
any good parent, I understood the purpose of these races to be that of
encouraging his budding love of sport and competition, so I made sure to let him
win or to make it a close, rousing competition.
But every now and then I would forget. I, too, love to run and enjoy the
feeling of turning it on and crossing the finish line first (or maybe just not last).
Joshua is my youngest child and at this point he was the only child I could still
beat on foot. Fueled by some sudden vain ambition (i.e., midlife crisis),
occasionally I would take off running at full speed and easily beat him to the bus

stop. Catching my breath and looking back, I would see that he had stopped
running and was now walking. This seemed strange because he loved to race! As
he walked closer, the look on his face was a muddle of disappointment and
disapproval. When he arrived at the bus stop, he would shrug his shoulders and
say indifferently, “We weren’t racing that time.” Every time I lost my head and
raced out in front, creating a gap too big for him to close, the same scene ensued.
He had learned that when he couldn’t keep up, it was best to just let me win.
As leaders, sometimes the faster we run, the slower others walk. When leaders
set the pace, they are more likely to create spectators than followers.

Rapid Responder
What about the leader who is quick to take action? This is the leader who prizes
agility and fast turnaround. He takes responsibility and is “on it”—he is quick to
respond, troubleshoot problems, and make fast microdecisions. Most of us work
with some sort of rapid responder. He sees a problem; he solves it. He sees a
bear; he shoots it. Emails don’t last long in his in-box. He opens, reads, and
resolves immediately. His intent is noble, of course. He wants an agile
organization that pounces on problems and responds rapidly to stakeholders.
But instead of agility, the Rapid Responder tends to generate low-grade
apathy. Even the best employees are slow to respond when they know that
someone else is already “on it.” Consider what happens when an urgent email
hits an employee’s in-box. She opens the email and recognizes its importance.
She sees that her boss is copied on it, but the issue falls in her area of
responsibility, so she jumps on it. She rereads it carefully and thoughtfully
contemplates the options. She realizes that she needs more information and
consults a colleague. When the employee returns to draft her reply, she notices
she has new mail and gets that sinking feeling that her boss may have already
responded in the interim. And of course he has. Not wanting to get out of synch,
she just lets it go. When this happens frequently enough, employees learn to just
let the boss deal with the issue—even when the issue at hand was actually theirs
to handle. Not only is the Rapid Responder the first one and the only one to
respond, this boss is the only one growing.
The Rapid Responder can create activity traffic jams across his organization.
Because he responds to problems and questions quickly, he releases a lot of

decisions into the workflow of his team. The roads become flooded with
decisions and as those decisions prompt an excess of action, people move at a
crawl, and soon it is full-fledged gridlock.
The leader reacts quickly, but the people around him tend to react slowly, if at
all.

Optimist
This positive, can-do manager always sees possibilities and believes that most
problems can be tackled with hard work and the right mindset. She has read the
research on the power of positive thinking and the incredible mental and
physical benefits of optimism. She is a “glass half full” kind of person.
The Optimist isn’t necessarily a cheerleader; she just focuses on what is
possible and believes that the people around her (herself included) are smart and
can figure it out. So how could this possibly be diminishing?
A colleague and I were in the middle of a high-stakes research project where
we had a small window of opportunity to write an article for a prestigious
academic publication. To pull this off, we needed to complete some complex
analysis, do a round of additional research, and actually write the article, all
while working on several other projects and operating on a thin budget.
After years of experience in the corporate world, where a given week involved
juggling knives, pulling rabbits out of hats, and rubbing two nickels together to
pay for it all, to me this seemed feasible and an interesting challenge. I
enthusiastically attacked the project, providing leadership along the way to my
more junior colleague.
At one critical meeting, he turned to me and said, “Liz, I need you to stop
saying that!”
“Saying what?” I asked.
He replied, “‘How hard can it be?’”
I looked puzzled. He explained, “You say that all the time: ‘How hard can it
be? We can do this. After all, how hard can it be?’ ”
I could see his point emerging. While I was working for Oracle, a rapidly
growing company, I had been thrown into management at the tender age of
twenty-four and faced a steady onslaught of challenges for which I was
untrained and underprepared. These formative experiences taught me that a team

of smart, driven people could do almost anything. I learned to say to myself, I
can do this. After all, how hard can it really be? This attitude (termed a “growth
mindset” by Dr. Carol Dweck)1 had worked beautifully for me and many of my
colleagues over the years.
My current colleague’s voice reeled me back from my reflection: “Yes, that is
what I need you to stop saying.”
“But why?” I probed. He paused and looked me straight in the eye and said,
“Because what we are doing is actually really hard.” After another deliberate
pause he continued, “And I need you to acknowledge that.”
He wasn’t opposed to the idea that it was doable; he simply wanted me to
acknowledge the challenge and recognize his struggle. He didn’t want me
glossing over the challenge with my optimism. Having heard his sincere
message, I looked at him squarely and acknowledged, “Yes, what we are doing
is hard. It is really, really difficult. I suppose I just meant that we are very
capable, and I’m confident we’ll figure it out.” I could see the tension lifting. I
assured him that I would do my best to stop saying “that thing.” Meanwhile, in
the back of my mind I told myself, Sure, I can stop saying that. After all, how
hard can it be?
Is it possible that a can-do attitude that worked so well for you in a previous
role might be working against you as a leader? When you play the role of the
optimist, you undervalue the struggle the team is experiencing and the hardfought learning and work. Your staff may wonder if you have lost your tether to
reality. Or, worse, you might be sending an unintentional message that mistakes
and failure are not an option; after all, how hard can it be?
When the leader sees only the upside, others can become preoccupied with the
downside.

Protector
It’s easy for a well-intended manager to fall into the “mama bear” trap and
become the Protector who shields his or her staff, buffering people from the
hazards of corporate life, the way the grizzly female protects her offspring from
predators. Whereas the Rescuer saves the day after problems arise, the aim of the
Protector is simply to keep his people safe and unscathed—not even seeing the
problems. He worries that if team members get entangled in ugly politics, they

might be eaten alive, so he fights off bullies and shields his staff from nasty
internal politics.
Often managers have a better understanding of the darker forces that exist
inside the organization, and they assume that this is their burden to bear. The
Protector worries that if his people are exposed to the harsh reality, they might
become tainted or disillusioned and decide to leave for greener pastures. So, he
keeps his staff out of the most contentious meetings with senior executives,
knowing these encounters can be career limiting. He shields people from the
brutal facts and steers his team clear of danger and creates a seemingly safe
haven, a happy valley where his people can flourish. While certainly there are
situations when wise managers should shield their team, it can become a
dangerous practice itself.
Unfortunately, the “mama bear” can prevent staff from learning from hardship
and taking full accountability. It is a misguided attempt to manufacture safety.
We know that Multipliers create intellectual safety (where people are free to
express their ideas), but they don’t shield people from reality, and they don’t
necessarily remove obstacles for people. In fact, with the assumption that people
are smart and will figure it out, a Multiplier is inclined to expose people to such
toxins and challenges, hoping that they will build resistance and strength.
If the leader continually protects people from danger, they never learn to fend
for themselves.

Strategist
The Strategist is the big thinker who casts a compelling vision of the future. She
shows the team a better place, a destination worth striving for, and she sells it
with evangelical zeal. The Strategist thinks she is generating energy and the
momentum needed to escape the gravitational pull of the status quo. Certainly, a
wise leader knows how crucial it is to provide the big picture, the context, the
“why” behind what the team is doing. And it is.
But sometimes a strategic, visionary leader can go too far and be too
prescriptive. She might not be leaving enough space for others to think through
the challenges themselves and generate the intellectual muscle needed to make a
vision a reality. People can spend their time second-guessing what the boss
wants rather than finding answers themselves. Instead of running with it, people

climb up the mountaintop to seek guidance from the guru. This leader would
generate more movement by seeding a challenge rather than selling a big vision.
If you’ve built a reputation as a big thinker, don’t be surprised if people save
the big thinking for you.

Perfectionist
We all know the leader with perfectionist tendencies: he appreciates excellence
and loves the feeling of getting something perfect. He goes beyond setting a high
standard for others to follow (as does the Pacesetter) and wants everyone around
him to have the satisfaction of getting it just exactly right. So, he offers helpful
critiques and points out little mistakes and flaws, the way a home owner might
use blue construction tape to mark the slightest imperfections in a home
improvement project—a drip of paint here, a stray exposed nailhead there—so
the builder can fix the mistakes, work down the punch list, and enjoy pride of
craftsmanship.
While he is offering these suggestions for improvement, he is envisioning a
masterpiece in the making, an A+ grade on an important assignment. He knows
that excellence doesn’t come in one fell swoop, but in back-and-forth iteration.
But, while he see an A+ in progress, others see nothing but red marks and blue
tape all over their work. They see blood and loss and can easily become
disengaged and disheartened.
Sometimes a 90 percent solution executed with 100 percent ownership is
better than getting it 100 percent right with a disengaged team.
The above examples show just a few of the ways that well-intentioned leaders
can have a diminishing effect. As you read the various Accidental Diminisher
profiles above, surely some resonated, giving you a sharp insight or maybe even
a pang of guilt. The question isn’t which one of the above is your vulnerability;
the real question is, “How do you discover your areas of vulnerability?” You can
bring this vague suspicion into sharper focus by taking our online quiz, “Are
You an Accidental Diminisher?” at www.multipliersbooks.com. This threeminute quiz provides additional structure to help you self-assess and analyze
your potentially diminishing habits.

Are You an Accidental Diminisher?

I should clarify: having any of the above-described tendencies does not make
you a Diminisher; it simply increases the likelihood that you will have a
diminishing impact. That’s the good news. The bad news is that when you have
a diminishing impact, you are likely to be completely unaware of it and probably
the last to know. As a leader, how do you know whether you are having a
diminishing effect, despite having the best intentions? How do you increase your
self-awareness? Formulating and recording your own insights is a reasonable
first step, but you’ll learn more by asking the people you lead to share their
insights.
Several years ago I was teaching a Multipliers workshop in Abu Dhabi, in the
United Arab Emirates. The room was full of men in the beautiful white robes
and headpieces known as kanduras. I was on high alert, knowing the ideas were
perhaps unconventional and that the way I was teaching was probably violating
cultural norms. But the group was delightfully engaged and enjoying the session.
I asked each person to write down one way he or she might be accidentally
diminishing. They did. I then asked them to share their insight with their
colleagues at the table. They hesitated for a moment but then did. This was a
huge relief, so I sat down to collect my thoughts. A couple minutes later, I
looked up and noticed that the exercise was not proceeding as planned. There
was a swirl of white kanduras, and I could see that people were getting up and
moving around. Immediately I assumed that the participants were opting out of
the exercise and conducting other business instead. Concerned, I moved closer to
observe and then asked Khalid, a warm and perceptive Emirati national, to help
me understand what was happening. He responded, “We were sharing our own
observations, but then we realized we really should be asking our colleagues to
tell us how we are accidentally diminishing. We are moving into new groups, so
we can get feedback from the people we work with most closely.” I watched in
fascination as individuals moved energetically around the room, scurrying to
find a small group or partner who could give them honest feedback.
This leadership team understood that self-awareness as a leader comes from
understanding the perspectives of those we lead and serve, those who are the
“customers” of our leadership. Our learning can start with our own insight, but it
can’t end there.
As you seek to get feedback from others, you can use a 360-degree assessment

to get unfiltered feedback (see www.multipliersbooks.com), but you can also do
it the old-fashioned way—by asking good, honest, face-to-face questions. Here
are some questions you might use to elicit this feedback:
How might I be shutting down the ideas and actions of others, despite
having the best of intentions?
What am I inadvertently doing that might be having a diminishing
impact on others?
How might my intentions be interpreted differently by others? What
messages might my actions actually be conveying?
What could I do differently?
Hazel Jackson, cofounder and CEO of a consultancy in Dubai, includes this
question in each of the performance check-ins with her employees: How might I
be diminishing you? Then she listens and adjusts. You can get feedback through
a formal tool or through a casual conversation or a regular check-in. Either way,
what is critical is that you get new information to raise your self-awareness and
recalibrate your approach. To become intentional Multipliers, we must
understand how our best intentions can be translated and received differently by
others.

Leading with Intention
Leading with intention starts with understanding how our natural tendencies can
take us down the wrong path—how great habits and seemingly strong leadership
traits can go awry and become our vulnerability.
John C. Maxwell, the leadership author, coach, and speaker, is an undeniable
leadership genius. His 105 books, including thirteen bestsellers, have sold more
than 26 million copies. Not only does he teach leadership, he is a dedicated
practitioner as well. He has built five successful companies and has personally
mentored hundreds, if not thousands, of other leaders.
When John first heard the idea of leader-as-Multiplier, it struck a chord with
him. Every one of the ideals and practices of Multipliers resonated with what he
had practiced as a leader. However, the idea of the Accidental Diminisher gave

him pause. An avid learner, as he listened to the Diminisher qualities, he
recognized he had all of those, too, and he realized that some of his natural
strengths might be having a negative effect on his team. John identified his blind
spots and diminishing tendencies, especially as Pacesetter, Optimist, and
Rescuer.
John set a one-year goal to adjust his intentions and resist his diminishing
effects as a leader. He started by better understanding how his best intentions as
a leader might be accidentally diminishing his team and sought feedback from
his inner circle, particularly from Mark Cole, the CEO who runs his five
companies. The conversation was made possible by the trust they had built over
many years of working and growing together. Mark and others helped John see
that, while he was often needed to hit home runs for the team, he didn’t need to
go to bat for his players as often as he had been doing. John, a sports fan, could
see his vulnerability. He believes that everything rises and falls on leadership, so
it is hard for him to stand back and let one of his players strike out. He started to
use an idea he got from Glen Jackson, cofounder of Jackson-Spalding. In
baseball, a 3–2 count is called a “full count,” meaning that just one more strike
will cause the player to strike out and have no more opportunities to get on base
and score. John said, “When the count is 3 and 2, my natural tendency is to step
in and take the last swing.”
John and his team developed a code. When a project seemed to be in jeopardy,
Mark or another trusted colleague would say, “The count is still 3 and 1.” The
message was clear—the team member was indeed struggling but was not yet in
danger of striking out. John could stand back a little longer.
For example, one of John’s leaders started creating a new business line. That’s
not unusual, because John is very entrepreneurial, and so is his team. However,
this particular business wasn’t right for John. It didn’t fit his vision. John’s
natural inclination would have been to jump in and address the issue. Instead, he
allowed Mark Cole to address it the way he wanted to. John backed off and
allowed Mark to take leadership on the issue, and he worked it out effectively.
John realized that when he held back, it didn’t express indifference but rather
a vote of confidence in his player at bat. Mark said, “John allowed me to handle
it with my solution and in my timing. It actually worked out very well and gave
me greater credibility with the leader. And we were able to get that leader’s area

back on track.”
Later, John reflected, “Learning about Diminishers and working on my own
diminishing tendencies has been one of the most important things I’ve done for
my growth in the last year.” This leader who has developed millions of other
leaders is able to do so because he never stops developing himself.
To lead on purpose, we must understand how we diminish by accident. How
might you be accidentally diminishing? How can you see what you alone can’t
see?
Even the best leaders have blind spots. Once you identify yours, you can work
with your team to develop a set of signals and workarounds. Having a set of
common signals will help you spot and avoid Diminisher bait; the workarounds
will then help you turn these would-be diminishing episodes into Multiplier
moments.
The following chart offers strategies to develop these new practices. You
might try one of the Multiplier Experiments found in appendix E. Or you might
try a simple workaround that you can use in the moment. These include abiding
by a simple rule of thumb like Wait twenty-four hours before replying to emails
if you want others to respond or creating a filter like If you don’t want anyone to
take action on this idea, don’t share it yet. As one aspiring Multiplier said, “I
can’t control the ideas that pop into my head, but I can control the ones that
come out of my mouth.”

Do Less and Challenge More
Becoming a Multiplier often starts with becoming less of a Diminisher. And this
usually means doing less: less talking, less responding, less convincing, and less
rescuing of others who need to struggle and learn for themselves. By doing less,
we can become more of a Multiplier.
Doing less to achieve more is one of many examples where counterintuition is
more instructive than intuition. When no one else is speaking up, the compelling
inclination is to jump in and fill the void, but we become a Multiplier when we
learn to hold back and allow silence to draw others in. When we feel the need to
be big, let it be a signal that we need to be small and dispense our views in small
but intense doses. And when our instincts tell us to help more, we might need to

help less.
Becoming a Multiplier requires us to understand how our most noble
intentions can have a diminishing effect, sometimes deeply so. American
theologian Reinhold Niebuhr said, “All human sin seems so much worse in its
consequences than in its intentions.” Likewise, while leaders view their own
leadership through the lens of their positive intentions, their staff perceives that
same behavior only by its negative consequences. By learning to do less and
challenge more, we can transform ourselves from Accidental Diminisher to
Intentional Multiplier.

Chapter Seven Summary

The Accidental Diminisher
ACCIDENTAL DIMINISHERS are managers who, despite the very best of intentions,

have a diminishing impact on the people they lead.
Accidental Diminisher Profiles
Idea Guy: Creative, innovative thinkers who think they are stimulating ideas in
others Always On: Dynamic, charismatic leaders who think their energy is
infectious Rescuer: Empathetic leaders who are quick to help when they see
people struggling Pacesetter: Achievement-oriented leaders who lead by
example and expect others to notice and follow Rapid Responder: Leaders who
are quick to take action believing that they are building an agile, action-oriented
team Optimist: Positive, can-do leaders who think their belief in people will
inspire them to new heights Protector: Vigilant leaders who shield people from
problems to keep them safe Strategist: Big thinkers who cast a compelling
vision thinking they are showing people a better place and providing the big
picture Perfectionist: Leaders who strive for excellence and manage the fine
details to help others produce superior work Decreasing your Accidental
Diminisher Tendencies
• Seek feedback
• Lead with intention
• Practice the workarounds and learning experiments found in appendix E,
“Multiplier Experiments”
• Do less and challenge more

CHAPTER EIGHT

Dealing with Diminishers

However vast the darkness, we must supply our own light.

STANLEY KUBRICK
Sean Heritage is a cryptologic warfare officer in the US Navy. He attended the
US Naval Academy and earned graduate degrees from Johns Hopkins University
and the Naval War College. He is representative of a growing class of military
leaders who are not just brilliant commanders but also innovative thinkers, fierce
learners, and collaborative leaders.
After a tour serving as commanding officer, Heritage was assigned to a joint
command under the leadership of a colonel in the US Air Force. Commander
Heritage’s immediate senior wasn’t just from a different branch of the military;
he operated with a very different leadership style. This colonel apparently never
learned that a leader’s responsibility is to inspire others to accomplish the
“what,” not to dictate a specific “how.” He told people exactly what to do and
showed visible disappointment when subordinates took another approach, even
when they delivered the desired outcome. While Commander Heritage and the
rest of the team poured their hearts and souls into their work, the colonel found
ways to deliver consistently destructive criticism. After months of cutting
remarks from his superior and his own stymied attempts to make progress,
Commander Heritage finally hit a wall—quite literally, he punched a wall in the
colonel’s office. After he collected himself and apologized for his unprofessional
behavior, the sting of the wall still hurt, but it was nothing compared to the dull
ache of knowing he was stationed at this post for two more years. He felt stuck

and helpless and even contemplated leaving the navy.
Commander Heritage turned to his peers for guidance. Their response was
affirming: “Don’t quit on us. You are our beacon of hope, our ray of light.”
Commander Heritage sought additional guidance from his trusted Personal
Board of Directors (PBOD), a group of senior mentors he consulted with
regularly. His PBOD gave him a forum to vent and the opportunity to learn from
their wisdom, and Commander Heritage began to reorient himself. Instead of
complaining about the leader he didn’t have, he would be the leader his team
deserved and attempt to inspire the colonel to do the same. To address his
disappointing reality, he started pretending a bit more. He played the “as if”
game, operating as if his boss were more of a Multiplier. Instead of keeping his
superior officer out of his operation, he brought him in. He wanted the colonel to
see the energy of the team, so he invited him to witness the party himself. Rather
than criticize the work transpiring in his absence, the colonel began cocreating a
movement that was shaped in his presence. Sean reflected, “We were on the
same ship and on the same course, but we were now moving faster.”
Heritage began making fun at work a more visible priority and spent time
developing the leadership skills of his peers and juniors. And, yes, he shared an
abstract of this book, held discussions with his team, and even created a “culture
club” for those who wanted to help create a more collaborative work
environment. He reinforced all attempts at Multiplier leadership with the people
around him, and all along the chain of command. He didn’t wait for perfect
behavior; he celebrated anything in the right direction, even attempts that were
wobbly at first. He said, “If you want to change the culture, you have to be like
Wayne Gretzky, the ice hockey legend, and ‘skate to where the puck is heading.’
” Focusing on what happened to be in his control, he decorated his workspace,
introducing a new piece of art each week. As a way to share his personality and
lighten up the mood, he brought in some happy, hopeful pieces—graphic
illustrations with titles such as Making Ideas Happen and Stay Amazing—which
became affectionately known as the “Wall of Optimism.”
Two months later, the colonel removed his second in command and asked
Heritage to serve in that role. This appointment served for the entire team as a
visible validation of Commander Heritage’s leadership style and the culture they
were now building together. A year later, when the colonel retired, he spoke at

length during his retirement ceremony about Sean’s influence on him as a leader.
Soon after, the four-star admiral leading US Cyber Command at the National
Security Agency asked Commander Heritage, artwork and all, to join him in the
front office and serve as his executive assistant. As Sean shifted his focus from
confronting to constructing, he found greater purpose as a leader; he was no
longer a victim of poor leadership but a respected leader who was shaping the
future.
Sometimes, the best way out of a diminishing situation is to multiply up.
When stuck under a Diminisher, what’s your best strategy? It is tempting to hit a
wall and confront your Diminisher; it is equally tempting to fall back and
comply. But there is a third, more productive, alternative: multiply your way out.
Too many well-intended mangers are stuck beneath diminishing leaders. They
aspire to lead by bringing out the best in others but find themselves being sucked
down a Diminisher’s vortex. I often hear the following said in frustration: “I
want to be a Multiplier leader, but my boss is a total Diminisher, so I can’t.” Or,
as one group of South African managers put it, “We’ve all heard about
Multipliers, but what the [bleep] do we do about the Diminishers around here?”
How do you work for someone who is sucking the life out of you, slowly
draining your energy? How can you possibly bring out the best in others when
your boss brings out the worst in you? The research my team and I conducted,
interviewing dozens of professionals and surveying hundreds more, showed that
the five most prevalent reactions to Diminishers are: 1) confront them, 2) avoid
them, 3) quit, 4) comply and lie low, and 5) ignore the diminishing behavior. My
research also showed that the five least effective strategies in dealing with
Diminishers are: 1) confront them, 2) avoid them, 3) comply and lie low, 4)
convince them you are right, and 5) take HR action. In other words, the most
popular strategies for dealing with Diminishers are also the least effective.1
However, we shouldn’t be surprised that strategies for dealing with
Diminishers are faulty and feckless. After all, that’s the point—we aren’t at our
best around Diminishers. The anxiety they invoke triggers our brain’s amygdala
(our emotional brain), which reacts faster and hijacks our neocortex (our rational
brain), which leads to irrational actions and destructivity.2 When powers of
reasoning are threatened, it follows that judgment and coping strategies for
dealing with Diminishers are vulnerable as well. Dealing with Diminishers is

difficult and requires our best thinking.
This chapter is for those of you stuck under diminishing leaders; it’s intended
to supply you with proven strategies to help you respond at your best. If you are
fortunate enough to be surrounded by Multipliers, skip this chapter and proceed
to the final chapter, “Becoming a Multiplier.”
This chapter’s message is simple: you can be a Multiplier while working for a
Diminisher. With the right mindset and a set of smart tactics, you can minimize
the diminishing effect. There are no templates, just sound ideas that must be
executed with discretion and savvy. While leading like a Multiplier might be
management science, dealing with Diminishers is an art form. But done
thoughtfully and persistently, you might even find that you become immune to
the effects of diminishing leaders. Ultimately, you might join the ranks of those I
call Invincibles—people who continue to work using their highest capacity and
offer their greatest intelligence, despite being surrounded by diminishing
behaviors.

The Death Spiral Versus the Growth Cycle
Being diminished, especially chronically, is both stressful and exhausting.
Although people react to being diminished in a myriad of ways, there are a
couple of knee-jerk responses. As Dieter, a corporate middle manager from
Europe, observed, “It is easier to align with the Diminisher and feast on the
misfortune of other colleagues than it is to fight the battle and get eaten too.” It’s
also easier to return a set of diminishing actions with a diminishing response.
Unfortunately, this only perpetuates the problem.
Consider the following picture of the “spiral of despair.” Your boss is a
micromanager—he controls, dictates, and obsesses over the minutest details of
your work. In public and on the surface, you respectfully acquiesce to his
directives and inquisitions, but in private, with the professional mask off, you
feel disrespected, untrusted, unseen, and undervalued. We feel that our most
basic sense of self-determination has been denied.
When we sense we’ve been wronged or wrongly judged, our natural instinct is
to be judgmental in return. So we criticize. We stop listening and become
dismissive of their input. We want the diminishing to stop, so we exclude the

Diminisher, keeping the boss at arm’s length or further if we can. Or, if we’ve
been made to feel like we can’t do anything right, we cease trying or tune out.
But the death spiral does not end there, with merely disaffected relationships,
because the diminishing tends to increase. When bosses sense that their power is
being threatened or their ideas not heard, they tend to respond with even greater
force, typically doubling down on their point of view. When denied access to
details, micromanagers become nervous, even suspicious. Sensing that
something is amiss, they interfere more, determinedly forcing themselves into
discussions and decisions. Now there is a standoff—not between a Diminisher
and a victim but rather, between two Diminishers—the original micromanaging
boss and the newly minted Diminisher, who is now bringing out the worst in the
boss.
As depicted in the chart below, the spiral continues: they prescribe, we
withdraw; they decree, we give up; and once again they conclude that the only
way to get something done is to be all over us. The research that I have
conducted indicates this extended spin cycle lasts, on average, 22 months, which
is 85 percent of the average duration of time the survey respondents worked with
the person.

THE DIMINISHING DEATH SPIRAL

This scenario is, unfortunately, all too common. It is impossible to diminish
someone out of being a Diminisher. The best way out of a diminishing death
spiral is through multiplication—using the logic of multiplication and leading
like a Multiplier yourself.
Let’s look at how changing your response can break the cycle of diminishing.
Say you work for a micromanaging tyrant. What if, instead of responding with
criticism and avoidance, you respond with intellectual curiosity, a hallmark of
Multiplier leaders? True intellectual curiosity is a deep and persistent desire to
know or understand. While we hope that curiosity does not “kill the cat,” as the
adage goes, we know that it can kill conflict. What if you took his perspective
and asked questions like: Why is he worried? What does he need from me to feel
confident and in control of his business? Or, simply, What causes an otherwise
decent human being to act like a Diminisher?
As you ask these questions and build empathy for his concerns and reality,

you might listen in order to understand the source of tension. With ego set aside,
you might even find yourself noticing and appreciating his strengths or feeling
less angry, and with this insight, you can then work in a more cooperative spirit
that smooths ruffled feathers and makes everyone less defensive.
As you respond differently, your Diminisher is likely to respond differently as
well. Feeling more respected, he is apt, in turn, to extend more respect. The same
process works in building (or rebuilding) trust.3 When you demonstrate
understanding of his expectations, the diminishing manager is more likely to
back off and allow more space to breathe and room to maneuver. He might even
show more appreciation for your work. As depicted in the chart below, the
diminishing death cycle breaks, and confrontation or tepid compliance is
replaced with cooperation—not between a Diminisher and an employee, but
between a more elastic Diminisher and a Multiplier, one who brings out the best
in everyone, including a pain-in-the-backside boss.

BREAKING THE DIMINISHING DEATH SPIRAL

Let me clarify further, for those of you thinking, You don’t understand my
boss; this person is a hardened, lifelong, textbook Diminisher and isn’t going to
change. Changing your response, no matter how enlightened you become, isn’t
guaranteed to change a Diminisher, but it will turn down the volume on the
Perfectionism, the Rescuing, Pacesetting, and other diminishing practices,
allowing you more space to think and work.

Cycle Breakers
When dealing with a Diminisher, you can hope—dream even—that this person
will become a Multiplier, and perhaps she will. Or you can choose to be the
Multiplier yourself. Most great accomplishments require a great leader—but the
leader may not always be the boss. Sure, no one likes having to be “the adult” to
an incapable parent, but we all crave being allowed to work at our best.

Here we offer strategies to break the cycle of diminishing and mitigate the
havoc of less-than-wonderful bosses and toxic colleagues. These tactics were
suggested by my research as well as my own experience in the workplace and
flow from a set of fundamental principles about the nature of humans at work.
1. IT’S NOT NECESSARILY ABOUT YOU. Although you are the one feeling the

pain, your actions aren’t necessarily the root cause. The Diminisher’s
behavior is more likely a function of the pressure they feel from above
or the residual effects of ineffectual role models from their past. But, at
the same time, it is entirely possible that your reactions to the
Diminisher are inflaming the situation.
2. DIMINISHING ISN’T INEVITABLE. When dealing with a controlling boss, we
have more control than we might think. We choose how much
legitimacy we grant to a Diminisher’s views; we choose whether or not
we embrace lowered expectations for ourselves; we choose how she
makes us feel. Those are choices. So, too, we can choose to maintain
high expectations for ourselves, and our own analysis and evaluation of
our contribution can help us to stand up to Diminishers in healthy and
helpful ways. The diminishing may continue, but we can mitigate its
destructive effect.
3. YOU CAN LEAD YOUR LEADER. Very few managers will ever know you as
well as you do. Therefore, if you want someone to utilize you at your
best, you will need to guide them. You can be your own agent and
advocate for your capabilities and defend yourself from well-meaning
but overbearing management.
From my initial research, it was obvious that Diminishers were getting a
reduced level of capability from others. But it wasn’t until more research, after
I’d heard from thousands of people who were stuck working for Diminishers,
that I fully understood the deep crater carved by these leaders. People who are
shut down, limited, and bullied at work feel the toxic effects seep into all aspects
of their lives. People consistently reported experiencing increased stress, reduced
confidence, low energy, depression, poor health, general unhappiness, and more.
And the collateral damage doesn’t stop there; if not addressed, diminishing

usually intensifies. The majority of individuals also reported that they carried
stress home and became angry and irritable, complained more, and withdrew
socially.
Among the hundreds of comments in our study, there were two that especially
struck me. One person wrote, “I doubted I could do anything right, and I doubted
that anything I had done had been right. I felt like I was a disappointment to my
family, my friends, and my coworkers. I unfriended most everyone on
Facebook/Google+, had massive depressive episodes, and even contemplated
ending my life.” The other heart-wrenching story was from someone who said
that the stress and self-doubt got so bad, “I couldn’t even take care of my dog.”
The strategies offered below are intended to improve your reactions to
Diminishers, relieve stress, neutralize immediate problems, and halt the
downward spiral. They are basic survival strategies—self-defense to help you
work with the more entrenched, hardened Diminishers and to help minimize the
magnitude of their sting. None of these strategies will immediately transform the
Diminisher into a Multiplier leader (nor ever be able to solve deep psychological
problems). What these strategies can do, when played well, is to greatly decrease
the diminishing effect a person is having on you and allow your ideas to be
heard, buying you some valuable thinking time and enabling you to play bigger.
All of these strategies work off the core assumptions that It’s not necessarily
about you, Diminishing isn’t inevitable, and You can lead your leader. On Level
1 are defensive moves to enable you to deflect diminishing actions. On Level 2
you’ll find proactive strategies, offense plays to aid your forward progress. Level
3 gives coaching strategies for you to help the Accidental Diminisher become
more of a Multiplier.
It will be worth your while to try the strategies on Levels 1 and 2 before going
on to Level 3. You might think of the three levels as loosely following a
“research and development” timetable where you don’t want to rush the new
product to the market without performing due diligence. Though most people
wish to start at Level 3, few find themselves with permission to coach before
they’ve invested time in strengthening their own game skills.

Level 1: Defenses Against the Dark Arts of Diminishing Managers
1. TURN DOWN THE VOLUME. A colleague of mine was once described as “a dog

that barks at everything,” meaning that she was overly reactive to potential
threats and didn’t differentiate between serious attacks and passing annoyances.
My research showed that people who cope best with Diminishers don’t bark at
every disturbance. They’ve learned what to ignore. They don’t avoid the
Diminisher or pretend the problem doesn’t exist; they merely tune out some of
the interference. They choose to turn down the volume, reducing the
Diminisher’s intrusion into their head and the other person’s consumption of
their life and psychic energy.
When we are being nitpicked and undermined, we tend to turn inward and
question ourselves. It’s easy to assume that the Diminisher doesn’t value our
contribution; however, in reality, they probably just value their own contribution
more. Instead of reading too much into a situation, we can zoom out and take a
broader perspective.
When Jackie,4 a talented HR executive, took a senior management role at a
hot start-up company, she was expecting both challenge and adventure. What
she hadn’t anticipated was that her biggest challenge would be working for an
unpredictable CEO who flip-flopped on critical decisions and intruded into every
situation in order to dominate. Jackie felt continually frustrated with her boss
and contemplated leaving. After several agonizing months, she decided that she
would neither take it personally nor let the situation define her. She stepped
back, took inventory of her life values, and realized, “the worst thing that can
happen to me is getting fired, and, in the grand scheme of things, that’s not the
worst thing that can happen to me.” With her diminishing boss in perspective,
she did what she could to create a positive environment. She didn’t roll over and
play dead, and she didn’t let the situation kill her joy.
Ignoring a negative situation typically requires an active choice. This is how
Glenn Pethel, a sage education leader from Georgia, has learned to manage
through frequent brushes with uncooperative colleagues. After these contentious
encounters, his close associates would ask him why he wasn’t upset. Pethel, who
speaks with a gentle, southern charm, would reply, “Because I don’t want to be.
Something caused this person to behave this way, and it wasn’t necessarily me.
Do I like it? No. But it’s not going to dip from my bucket.”
As when dealing with teenagers, a smart parent knows to ignore a lot of noise
and negative stimulus. You need to continually remind yourself, It isn’t me, and

it isn’t forever. Ignoring a persistently defeating and deafening message is a big
task. But it becomes easier to filter it out when you turn down the volume of
diminishing messages and turn up the volume for other, more enabling, voices—
your own, as well as those of supportive leaders and colleagues.
2. STRENGTHEN OTHER CONNECTIONS. Building on the idea above, we can reduce

the effects of the Diminisher by increasing our connections to different people
and work. In other words, if you can’t get inside the Diminisher’s trust circle,
build other circles of influence.
When Chuck, now a director at a large accounting firm, was a project
manager, he worked several levels under one of the firm’s tyrannical partners,
who created a tense environment, gave erratic feedback, and led people around
in circles. Chuck couldn’t figure out how to please this partner or make progress,
and he was spending most of his time editing and reworking documents based on
this partner’s random feedback. Feeling stuck and miserable, he wallowed for a
couple of months while he contemplated a complete career change. After some
therapeutic venting with his colleagues, his immediate manager gave him some
good advice: “Quit whining. Do something about it or leave.”
He realized that he wasn’t going to change the tyrannical partner, but he could
change his perspective. He divided his day into chunks in order to minimize the
time he spent responding to the plethora of comments from the partner. Instead
of trying to perfect the work, he made it directionally correct and then passed it
to the partner, knowing that another iteration was inevitable. He didn’t avoid the
partner, but he began spending much less time fending off diminishing feedback.
He spent his newly freed up time with clients and in benchmarking work with
other colleagues, both of which he found fulfilling. His confidence returned, and
he even mustered the courage to send an email to the partner providing feedback
on the ineffectiveness of their work process. The partner offered only a mild
apology, but taking action felt empowering to Chuck. The lesson he learned was
simple: Don’t let your domineering boss dominate your day.
Like Chuck, the individuals who most effectively deal with Diminishers take
steps to broaden their support base and strengthen other relationships, much like
a torn ligament requires the strengthening of proximal muscles. A petty officer
in the US Navy described it this way: “When I find myself dealing with a bad

leader, I still take their orders, but I latch on to another leader that I trust,
someone who can give me an alternative point of view, especially about myself.”
When you find yourself weakened by an overbearing or undermining
colleague, invest elsewhere, in places where you can build collateral strength.
Create an internal or external advisory board—a group of trusted colleagues or
mentors who can guide you as you navigate a difficult relationship. Find a safe
sounding board—colleagues where you can test your ideas and sanity-check
your work. (Make sure, though, that this does not become merely a place to vent
or an echo chamber for your current thinking.) Build a cheering squad—people
who know your real capabilities and can give you a useful second opinion and a
healthy new perspective on yourself. Their alternative view will remind you that
you are smart and will figure it out. Lastly, develop a career network—
supporters who will help you advance when your boss isn’t actively advocating
for you.
3. RETREAT AND REGROUP. It is never wise to go head-to-head with a headstrong

person, especially the boss. My research showed that a frontal attack, such as
trying to prove the merits of one’s ideas, only accelerated the death spiral (you
might recall that confrontation is the most used yet least effective approach).
Even when you win, the victories are usually pyrrhic.
When facing an impasse, try regrouping and resetting your aspiration—
instead of attempting to win, just stay in the game. A former executive at Apple
Inc. shared her strategy for pitching ideas to Steve Jobs. She knew there was
little chance of prevailing once Steve became agitated or opinionated. Rather
than argue her points, she listened, acknowledging his point of view. She then
asked for time to think through his ideas and come back with a plan. While she
regrouped, Steve became less entrenched. When she returned a few days later
with a plan that incorporated the best of both their ideas, she found a receptive
audience, and the plan advanced. While some people like to argue more than
others, everyone likes to hear that someone is seriously considering their
opinions. When you retreat and regroup, you give the Diminisher a way out as
well—an opportunity to gracefully rethink an issue and to save face.
4. SEND THE RIGHT SIGNALS. The primary cause of micromanaging (the most

prevalent form of diminishing) is concern that something won’t get completed

fully or correctly. As one Diminisher said, “I only become a micromanager when
I think it won’t get done.” You can ward off this form of diminishing by
providing delivery assurance. When you deliver the goods as promised, you earn
the Diminisher’s trust. As Stephen M. R. Covey says, “Trust, once lost can
indeed be rebuilt.”5 Trust gets built in layers, brick by brick. Each brick is a win,
a small success that tells the Diminisher that this person will make them look
good. And the positive cycle continues: every time you deliver, you earn the
opportunity to ask for the space and support you need to do your best work.
Our recent research showed that there is a greater risk of extreme diminishing
when the two individuals have dissimilar personality types or processing styles.
For example, a manager with a Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Judging style
(methodical and results oriented) is more likely to diminish an employee with a
Perceiving style (flexible and good at multitasking) than an employee with the
same style as his own.
To counter this dynamic, employees can send signals that keep their
manager’s inner Diminisher from leaking out. Heidi, a marketing executive with
a high Judging style, said, “People on my team who are Ps [Perceiving] just
don’t send me the signals I need to feel confident. I need them to do more than
tell me, ‘things are in good shape.’ I need them to give me updates without being
asked and say something more like, ‘we’ve hit each milestone, and we will be
ready to go by 8 a.m. tomorrow.’ ” Conversely, individuals with a Judging style
might need to demonstrate flexibility and let their Perceiving boss know that
they are open to new possibilities. They might need to say, “We have a plan, but
we are open to last-minute changes.” In either case, you can earn more space by
determining what is important to the Diminisher and then send signals that it is
also important to you.
Megan Lambert, an extremely bright business
consultant, was working as a volunteer in a meditation community that she
belonged to. Megan was to coordinate an event for members of their meditation
community but fell behind when she got caught up with several urgent work
projects. The volunteer leader, who was also a friend of Megan’s, was “all over
her” and began treating Megan like she was suddenly incapable, texting
frequently to check on her progress. After several frustrating days, Megan could
5. ASSERT YOUR CAPABILITY.

feel herself becoming halfhearted and lazy in her role, and she knew she needed
to reverse this cycle. An avid practitioner of Multiplier leadership, Megan said to
her friend-colleague, “Hey, let’s play a game. For three days, I want you to
believe that I’m amazing at this job. Just pretend I’m totally competent.” Her
friend agreed, and stepped back. Megan stepped up and began fulfilling her
volunteer responsibilities wholeheartedly again.
Sometimes you need to tell an overly helpful manager or colleague that you
don’t need help. If you’ve ever tried to help a three-year-old do something that
the child could do alone (like put on a coat or carry a plate), you know exactly
how the child will react. With a mix of conviction and outrage, the child will
say, “No. I can do it by myself!” As the child asserts her independence, the adult
remembers that the child is maturing and every day more capable than the day
before. Similarly, it is easy for corporate managers to overlook the growth of the
people they lead. However, by the time we enter the adult workplace, our inner
three-year-old has been socialized out. Instead of pushing back against
micromanaging bosses, we tend to let them step in when we could otherwise
handle it ourselves.
The next time a diminishing boss or colleague tries to do something for you
that you can do independently, try reminding the person that you can do it
yourself. There’s no need to throw a tantrum; just announce and assert your
capability. For example, you might say, “I appreciate the help, and I think I can
handle this one,” or “Can I try this by myself and come to you if I get stuck?”
When asking for some breathing room, a little humor goes a long way,
especially with the Accidental Diminisher. Ben Putterman, a longtime and dear
colleague of mine, had a delightfully direct way of letting me know when I was
micromanaging. If I was overly involved or prescriptive in a meeting, he would
wait until we left the room and then he would yank at an imaginary rope around
his neck, start gasping for air, and pretend to eek out, “Hey boss, you could
probably loosen the choke chain a bit.” We’d laugh, and more important, I’d get
the hint, back off, and let him lead.
If your boss doesn’t have a sense of humor (incidentally, humor is the trait
most negatively correlated with Diminishers), just play it straight. A simple IfThen statement works, such as, “If you give me the meeting topics in advance,
then I’ll come prepared with ideas” or “If you let me run the meeting, then I’ll

make sure we fully resolve the problem.” Whether your tone is lighthearted or
serious, asserting one’s capability is best done with humility and respect,
especially in cultures that value respect for authority. Lastly, when you assert
your capability and someone gives you space, be prepared to deliver your finest
thinking and work in return.
6. ASK FOR PERFORMANCE INTEL. It’s hard to be brilliant if you lack critical

information. In particular, people generally need two types of information to
achieve top performance. The first is clear direction—What is the target, and
why is it important? Diminishers often become so preoccupied with telling
people how to shoot that they forget to first establish the target. When a
Diminisher becomes immediately prescriptive, you can ask them to back up and
provide more context and direction.
When Kevin Grigsby, an organizational development expert in academic
medicine and science, got off the phone with an overly directive physician
leader, he faced a dilemma. The leader had been very clear what he wanted
Kevin to do and specified the exact technique he wanted him to use. But Kevin
knew that if he simply followed the doctor’s orders, the situation wouldn’t
improve. So, instead of blindly taking the prescription, he elevated the
conversation by asking, “Can you tell me more about what you want as an
outcome? What are you trying to accomplish?” After listening and
acknowledging the desired impact, he asked, “Are you okay if I take a different
route to get there?” The leader hesitated momentarily and said, “Sure, as long as
you get the same impact.” The next time someone gives you a statement of
work, ask to begin with a problem definition instead.
The second type of critical information is performance feedback: Am I
actually hitting the target? When someone is missing the target, Diminishers
tend to reiterate how to do it, rather than give information that would help the
person to adjust their technique or their aim. When faced with a deluge of
criticism, ask for feedback instead. The term feedback often carries the
connotation of criticism or judgment; however, technically speaking, feedback is
simply information to help recalibrate something. For example, a thermostat
takes periodic readings to determine if the room temperature is warmer or cooler
than the established target. This information is then used to raise or lower the

temperature. If you are receiving too much criticism but not enough critical
performance intel, ask for it. Try asking, “What should I be doing more of? Less
of?” And, if you want to be on target more often, request feedback at more
frequent intervals.
7. SHOP FOR A NEW BOSS. If you are in a diminishing environment, you have to ask

yourself if this is the right place for you. If you are being forced into a small box
where you can’t grow, you might need to take the hermit crab’s approach and
find a bigger home where you can grow. It is probably not surprising that
quitting your job is by far the most effective defense against Diminishers.
(Unfortunately, against some diminishing managers, it is the only reasonable
defense.)
Of course, for many people quitting isn’t an option. But if you do quit, don’t
just swap one bad manager for another. Instead of simply searching for a new
job, go shopping for your next boss. You’ll be living with this decision for years,
so, just as you would when making any major purchase, get information first.
Ask good questions and then watch for evidence of Multiplier leadership. Pay
attention to their talk-to-listen ratio. Listen to how they talk about their team. Do
they mention people’s brilliance or do they list their duties? How much
ownership do team members have? How do decisions get made? Check reviews
and see what former employees say. There are a number of websites that provide
transparency into the actual inner workings of a company and its management
culture.6 You might also try before you buy and work initially as an independent
contractor or consultant. If this isn’t feasible, ask to sit in on a team meeting or
participate on a conference call to better understand how the team works. For
further guidance, see the Multiplier Experiment “Shopping for a New Boss” in
appendix E.
As you seek to ward off Diminishing actions, a couple of caveats are in order.
First, all of the above strategies are defensive moves that minimize the reductive
effects of Diminishers. Deploying any of the above strategies need not be big
conversations (other than quitting your job); they are little adjustments, part of
your day-to-day interaction, that help you remain whole and work at your best.
They are meant to project your strengths, not expose the Diminisher’s
weaknesses. These strategies aren’t likely to change the leader, but they can

certainly alter the dynamic.
Second, remember that if you are constantly surrounded by Diminishers, at
some point you have to ask yourself, “Is it me?” You might be taking things too
personally, reading malice into otherwise well-intended criticism or even
looking for insults in compliments. It might be time to see your Diminishers as
Accidental Diminishers, leaders with good intentions. Or you may have to admit
that you are diminishing in the other direction—upward. The remedy in all cases
is the same: be a Multiplier, down, out, and up.

Level 2: Multiplying Up
Many corporate managers have experience as Multipliers “down” to their direct
reports and staff, but fewer are Multipliers “out” to their peers or “up” to their
bosses. Our analysis of the Multipliers 360 assessment7 has shown that, on
average, managers are utilizing approximately 76 percent of the intelligence of
their direct reports and only 62 percent of their peers and 66 percent of their
supervisors. Yet my research has also shown that people can serve as Multipliers
from any direction, even upward to a diminishing supervisor.
Here’s why: Diminishers want to be valued for their intelligence and ideas; in
fact, many are desperate for it. On the other hand, Multipliers enjoy finding other
people’s genius and engaging it. In many ways, Diminishers need Multipliers. It
may not be a match made in heaven, but it is a strategy to help you escape a
hellish experience, because when you bring out the best in your boss, you help
create the conditions under which you can work at your best. When Diminishers
feel smart, valued, heard, included, and trusted, they extend more trust in return.
Essentially, by being a Multiplier to your boss, you’ll create your own Multiplier
environment, a place where you can thrive, not just survive.
The following are several ways you can be a Multiplier to those above you in
the organization or to diminishing colleagues at your side. They aren’t meant as
defenses against the raving, tyrannical Diminishers; rather, these are offense
plays, intended to help you move your contribution forward, especially with
Accidental Diminishers, the otherwise good people who fail at being good
bosses.
1. EXPLOIT YOUR BOSS’S STRENGTHS. Instead of trying to change your boss, focus

on trying to better utilize his or her knowledge and skills in service of the work
you’re leading. You don’t need to cede ownership; just make sure to use his or
her capabilities at key junctures and in ways they can be most helpful. If she has
a critical eye, could you use her to help diagnose an underlying problem in a
project? Or, if he’s a big-picture thinker, could you have him share his vision to
help win over a key customer?
Ron, a senior executive at Apple Inc. widely regarded for his own creative
genius, was asked to build a new, highly strategic business for Apple. He could
have let Steve Jobs, the company’s notoriously hands-on CEO, dictate the details
of the project, or he could have tried to keep Jobs from interfering in the process.
Instead, Ron sought out Job’s special insight at critical development points. He
took the product design to him and openly asked, “How can we make this even
better?” Jobs, whose native genius had been invoked, responded not with
criticism but by rattling off numerous ideas for turning good features into great
ones. Ron allowed his team to do their best work, and then used the strengths of
his boss to take it to the next level. Even if you don’t work for a genius like
Steve Jobs, you can use the same technique.
2. GIVE THEM A USER’S GUIDE. If you are one of the fortunate few, you have a

manager who is perceptive and takes note of your native genius—the thing you
do easily and freely. If, on the other hand, you are among the underutilized
majority, you needn’t sit idle, waiting to be discovered. You can broadcast your
capabilities and help your colleagues pick up the signal. Or you can simply tell
people what you are good at and how you can be best used.
Think of it like giving someone a user’s guide to you. A good manual tells
you what the product is designed to do and how best to use it. Let’s say you’re
considering buying a cordless reciprocating saw. The guide would indicate that
the saw can cut through a variety of materials—wood, plastic, and metal—and
could be used to cut wood studs, tree branches, PVC, metal pipe, and even nails.
The promotional literature might also indicate that it’s especially handy for
demolition and for working in hard-to-reach spots.
Likewise, you can give someone a user’s manual to you. What are you good
at? What do you do naturally, without much effort, and what do you do freely,
without being coerced or incentivized? Think of this as the thing you were built

to do. For example, your brilliance might be fixing broken processes—you find
the source of the derailment and get things back on track. Once you’ve figured
out your genius, give it a name, like “troubleshooting,” (or even a superhero
name like the Process Surgeon) and then outline a number of ways that your
genius can be put to work. For example, you could help your department get a
late project delivered on time, win back a troubled account, or lead a cross-team
task force to reduce bureaucracy. Once you’ve got your “guide” together,
discuss these ideas with your boss or the person who can cast you in these roles.
If you want to work at your highest point of contribution, you need to let
people know your value. Remember, getting to develop your natural brilliance at
work is a true privilege, so don’t play the prima donna. Just because you know
your native genius doesn’t mean you are excused from the parts of your work
that feel foreign or involve quotidian tasks.
3. LISTEN TO LEARN. Even if you find yourself stuck working for a Diminisher,

figure out what this person can teach you and how he or she can still help you
succeed. A common mistake people make in interacting with Diminisher bosses
is dismissing their criticism too quickly. In my years in senior management at
Oracle, I watched numerous people present to Larry Ellison, the company’s
brilliant and relentless CEO. Those who struggled (and barely survived) got into
intellectual standoffs with him. Those who thrived shared their ideas with
confidence, backed them up with data, but then stopped to really listen to Larry’s
reactions. They didn’t do this to placate him or merely to find a better angle for
selling their idea. They listened to learn. One of Larry’s executive staff said,
“Too many people don’t take the opportunity to really see what Larry can teach
them.”
Instead of going into battle, look for common ground. Glenn Pethel, the
education administrator mentioned earlier, is a master at working across divides
and building bridges. Perhaps there is something about going to war that helps
one learn diplomacy. As a young man in the late 1960s, he served as a soldier in
the Vietnam War and learned there his most important lessons on leadership. He
discovered that in the dark of the night, when you are exposed and afraid, you
learn to see differently. You look beyond outward appearances and differences
—be they race, religion, circumstance, or status—to truly see people and know

them for who they really are. Even shrouded in darkness, you can learn to trust
and find common purpose. This profound experience helped him to see beyond
diminishing behavior to discover ways to work together, even with very difficult
people.
Pethel offered this advice: “Diminishers want to be heard. They want to know
that the ideas that they put forth are really good ideas. If you start by
acknowledging their worth and that their ideas do have merit, you’ve got a good
beginning.” But, Pethel does more than just listen; he makes sure the person
knows he is genuinely listening. He faces them and asks, “Do you mind if I take
some notes? I like to go back and think about what you said.” He then
summarizes what he’s heard and looks for mutual agreement. In the process, the
other person becomes less of a Diminisher and more of a partner.
Instead of dissenting the next time your boss shifts into Diminisher mode, ask
questions that help your boss weigh both the upsides and downsides of her ideas.
Ask about her fundamental objectives. You might even take the Extreme
Questions challenge and keep asking sincere questions until you truly understand
the boss’s point of view. Once you are clear on what she really wants, you can
talk through alternative ways to help meet the objective.
When Shaw, the director of customer success for his company, took a
fourteen-day “dealing with Diminishers” challenge, he decided to focus on
listening to learn with his micromanaging boss, with whom he seldom agreed.
Shaw noted, “When I asked questions, I found out we were actually on the same
page more often that I had thought. I had been shutting her out and making
assumptions too early.”
Wahiba, a sales manager in Tunisia, took the same fourteen-day challenge
with her hypertalkative boss and said, “When my boss discovered that I listened
carefully and took notes, she was more supportive, less nervous, and we had a
constructive discussion. And, when I listened without interrupting, my boss
shared critical information my team needed.”
4. ADMIT YOUR MISTAKES. You’ll remember that at the core of Diminisher logic is

the belief that people aren’t going to figure it out without me. Nothing fuels this
cycle like the unrepentant mistake. When an employee makes a mistake and
hides their misdeeds, it leaves the manager to question both their capability and

their judgment and to assume the mistake will be repeated. This can place the
manager on a trajectory to be overly prescriptive or to intervene at the first hint
of an error.
Consider breaking this cycle by talking frankly about your mishaps and
sharing what you’ve learned, both from successes and failures. The conversation
quickly shifts from blame and cover-up to recovery. When you transmit what
you learned, you earn the space you need to get it right the next time. Instead of
a Micromanager, your boss becomes more of an Investor—giving you
ownership and the accountability that goes with it. But not only do you earn
more space for yourself, you create space for others to share their mistakes also
—maybe even your boss. A boss sharing his or her own mistakes! That could
liberate an entire team and create a culture where experimentation and
innovative risk taking are legitimized.
So, don’t wait for your boss to hold a “screwup of the week” conversation
where people can confess and laugh off their mistakes. Set the tone by readily
admitting your mistakes, sharing your learning, and letting the boss know that
you’re smarter each time. Doing so will reinforce a core Multiplier belief that
people are smart and can learn from their mistakes and figure it out.
5. SIGN UP FOR A STRETCH. Managers can get stuck in the routine of giving people

additional work, somehow thinking that more work equates to more growth
opportunity. But doing the same thing over and over, faster and faster, does not
develop your skills (unless you happen to be a knife juggler). The rest of us grow
and learn by doing something hard, something we haven’t done before,
something we don’t yet know how to do. A good Multiplier would define an
opportunity that causes you to stretch; but just because your boss hasn’t asked
you to take on a new challenge doesn’t mean you can’t volunteer.
Send signals that you are ready to tackle a challenge that is a size too big. Let
your boss know that you are willing to do something uncomfortable. But be
careful: indicating a willingness to take on a new challenge can easily be
misconstrued as a request for a promotion or new job. Most managers don’t have
an endless supply of promotions to dole out, and their defenses flare when
employees come looking for “bigger jobs.” Most managers do have a heap of
challenges that they might be willing to share. We are suggesting that instead of

unilaterally seizing control of a bigger job, you show willingness to work
beyond the scope of your current one. You might extend your skills to a new
domain or staple yourself to a problem outside your immediate job description.
Or simply ask your manager what work you can take off her plate. Start small
and prove yourself. Instead of pining for an illusive promotion, construct a new
challenge and show your boss how it might lead to more.
6. INVITE THEM TO THE PARTY. Instead of keeping the Diminisher out of your

business, trying bringing them in. When someone is wreaking havoc on us and
others, our instinct tells us to keep that person away, to hold the enemy at bay.
Diminishers, when blocked, typically work even more aggressively to insert
themselves. Keeping the Diminisher on the other side of the door can weaken an
entire team. As discussed in chapter 7, “The Accidental Diminisher,” when we
attempt to protect people from harsh forces, we leave them disconnected from
reality and render them incapable of fending for themselves.
Rather than having your party crashed, what if you invited the Diminisher to
join the fun? This is, perhaps, the most revolutionary strategy for multiplying up.
What if you shared more data, invited them to meetings, and asked them to
weigh in on important issues? They might torment you and make your life
miserable (though, if that’s the case, they are probably already doing so). What
if, instead of barely tolerating them, you invited them along? Your transparency
is likely to signal that all is well and that you have nothing to hide. You might
even find that they enjoy the interaction and really feel good about working with
you. One middle manager made a point of including an otherwise diminishing,
interfering senior executive in a critical project. Although she could have run the
meetings without him, she included him on the agenda, asking him to kick off
the meeting, set the context, and then turn it over to her. At the end of the project
he remarked, “When I work with you, I feel like we can do anything.”
Sharing your space doesn’t mean giving free rein. By initiating interaction,
you can maintain more control over how the boss contributes, thus minimizing
the dreaded bungee-boss dynamic. For example, when you invite them to a
meeting, you can suggest what role you’d like them to play and specify when
you would like them to chime in. Or, when you submit a document for review,
point out specific questions you’d like them to address. In this way, you focus

their energy and steer their contribution to where it is most valuable or, perhaps,
simply to where it is least damaging.
While multiplying up is a great way to break a diminishing cycle, it’s not
limited to working with Diminishers; it works in 360 degrees, with everyone
around you. It is the hallmark of the Invincible Contributor—the individual who
is undeterred by otherwise diminishing superiors or depleting colleagues and
who steadily performs at his or her highest level no matter what.

Level 3: Inspiring Multiplier Leadership in Others
A natural consequence of embracing Multiplier leadership is the desire to aid
others in becoming Multipliers—especially if the other person happens to be our
boss and we feel their dulling effects on a daily basis. And, with the best
intentions, we set out to help others grow as leaders. But often it is with the
noblest intentions that we do the greatest damage. No matter how just the cause,
we cannot diminish someone into being a Multiplier.
People cannot change others, only themselves. And change will occur only if
an individual recognizes the problem of their own volition and has a deep desire
(and incentive) to change their mode of operation. How do you help leaders: 1)
to recognize the collateral damage left in their wake, and 2) to find a better way
of leading? How do you help the Accidental Diminisher become a more
intentional Multiplier? Here are a few strategies that raise awareness and
incentivize leaders to make the shift.
Few Diminishers are willing to engage in a
conversation about their diminishing ways. However, most managers are eager
to explore their good intentions. If you begin by assuming that your colleague
has positive intent, it will not only help you interpret their actions in the most
flattering light, it will provide a shared goal. Standing on common ground, you
can help your colleague see that they are not getting what they seek. For
example, to your Rapid Responder colleague, you might say, “I know you want
to create a responsive team, but when you are so quick to respond, other people
don’t get a chance to. If you were slower to action, other people would be
faster.”
1. ASSUME POSITIVE INTENT.

2. ADDRESS ONE ISSUE AT A TIME.

As we’ve seen, those who work with

Diminishers feel worn down and burdened. But if we unwisely unload all our
frustrations, the Diminisher will only feel attacked and retreat to what they know
how to do best—shut down ideas that are not their own. Instead, introduce one
small idea at a time.
3. CELEBRATE PROGRESS. When training a dolphin, the animal trainer doesn’t wait

until the dolphin jumps twenty feet out of the water and does a flip (the end goal
of the training) before giving the dolphin a bucket of fish. All behavior in the
right direction is rewarded with fish or other positive reinforcement. Likewise, if
you want to help someone lead in new ways, recognize and appreciate every
attempt in the right direction, even the smallest acts of good leadership.
While it is easy to see diminishing in others, it is most important to see it in
ourselves. Most of us have an inner Diminisher that may be triggered during
times of stress or crisis. Like a recessive gene that carries a predisposition for a
certain illnesses, the gene can lie dormant until environmental conditions trigger
the illness and you present symptoms. Your biggest opportunity to inspire
Multiplier leadership might be in learning to recognize your own Diminisher
traits and convert these conditions into Multiplier moments.
Or perhaps your breakthrough will come as you realize that you can be a
better leader than your boss. There is a hidden assumption in many organizations
that people are not expected, or even allowed, to outlead their bosses. The layers
of the org chart appear to form a glass ceiling that caps leadership effectiveness.
Given the extraordinary results that Multipliers achieve through others, I believe
one can lead like a Multiplier in a Diminisher environment. Give yourself
permission to be better than your boss. And then watch the organization take
notice.

Supply Your Own Light
Being underutilized or actively diminished can be a difficult, dark time in one’s
career. The gloom can spread across other facets of your life and feel allconsuming. It is easy to succumb to the fate of the unseen worker and fade away;
or to join in the diminishing and respond with your own disapproval, disregard,
and disengagement; or to keep quiet and hope that your diminishing boss

changes.
Or, you can be a cycle breaker. You can break the downward spiral of
diminishing leaders by better asserting your capabilities or by becoming the
leader that you wish you had. In our research process, the biggest regret people
expressed is that they didn’t take action sooner.
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. famously said:
The ultimate weakness of violence is that it is a descending spiral, begetting
the very thing it seeks to destroy. Instead of diminishing evil, it multiplies it.
. . . Returning violence for violence multiplies violence, adding deeper
darkness to a night already devoid of stars. Darkness cannot drive out
darkness: only light can do that.
When dealing with Diminishers, we may need to be the light that cuts through
the dark. In modern organizations, leadership does not only come from the top; it
radiates from the middle and ascends from the bottom. When you are trapped
working for a Diminisher, sometimes the only way out is up—multiplying up.
Because the only Diminisher you can change into a Multiplier is yourself.

Chapter Eight Summary

Dealing with Diminishers
You can be a Multiplier while working for a Diminisher.
Breaking the Cycle of Diminishing 1. It’s not necessarily about you
2. Diminishing isn’t inevitable 3. You can lead your leader Dealing with
Diminisher Strategies Level 1: Defenses Against the Dark Arts of Diminishing
Managers Basic survival strategies intended to improve your reactions to
Diminishers, relieve stress, neutralize immediate problems, and halt the
downward spiral.
1. Turn down the volume
2. Strengthen other connections 3. Retreat and regroup
4. Send the right signals
5. Assert your capability
6. Ask for performance intel 7. Shop for a new boss
Level 2: Multiplying Up Offense plays to help you be a Multiplier to those above
you in the organization or to diminishing colleagues at your side, especially
Accidental Diminishers.
1. Exploit your boss’s strengths 2. Give them a user’s guide 3. Listen to
learn
4. Admit your mistakes
5. Sign up for a stretch
6. Invite them to the party Level 3: Inspiring Multiplier Leadership in Others
Strategies that raise awareness and encourage leaders to make the shift
from Accidental Diminisher to a more intentional Multiplier.
1. Assume positive intent

2. Address one issue at a time 3. Celebrate progress

CHAPTER 9

Becoming a Multiplier

When I let go of what I am, I become what I might be.

LAO TZU

Bill Campbell, former CEO of Intuit, began his career more than thirty years ago
as a college football coach at an Ivy League university. As a coach he was smart,
aggressive, and hard-hitting. When he was recruited into the consumer
technology business, he operated in much the same way. When he was a young
marketing manager at Kodak, he would take over and rewrite the sales leaders’
business plans if he saw them failing. While working under detail-oriented John
Scully at Apple Computer, Bill became the ultimate Micromanager. He
burrowed into every detail in the business and directed every decision and
action. He said, “I drove everyone nuts. I was a real Diminisher. Believe me, I
made every decision, and I pushed everyone around. I was really bad.”

Confessions of a Diminisher
Bill recalls one of his worst moments. During an important staff meeting, a
member of his management team asked a simple question. Bill, annoyed at the
uninformed manager, turned to him, and sharply replied (replete with
unprintable colorful language), “That’s the dumbest question I have ever heard.”
The room went silent. Bill continued the meeting, uninterrupted by any other
annoying questions. Over the next few weeks, he noticed that most everyone
stopped asking him questions. He had dismantled the group’s curiosity.
While CEO at Claris, his hard-hitting leadership continued. A close colleague
came to him and confided, “Hey, Bill, we all came here because we liked
working for you at the last company. But you are back to your old ways. You are
pushing everyone around and making all the decisions.”
Bill knew she was right. And this wasn’t the only near-mutiny. Two months
into starting another company, a member of his management team approached
him and said, “I am here representing the whole group. If you don’t let us do our
jobs, we are going to regret coming here. We don’t want to leave, but we need to
be able to do our jobs.” Bill knew he was calling in plays at fourth down with
one yard to go. He was hurting his company and jeopardizing his team of
exceptionally smart players. And he wasn’t willing to lose them.

Becoming a Multiplier
Counsel from two bold colleagues was just the dose of self-awareness that Bill
needed. He could see his need for a course correction, and he made it. He started
by listening more and telling less. He began to develop a deep appreciation for
what his colleagues knew. As he recognized the diminishing effect he had on his
management team, he began to detect other Diminishers in his organization. He
began to counsel them. He recalled one person in particular who chronically
needed to prove he was the smartest guy in the room. Bill sat him down and
explained, “I don’t care how brilliant you are yourself. If you keep this up, you
are going to bring the organization to its knees. You are terrific, but you can’t
work here like this.”
Bill became a better leader over time. It was a steady transition that happened
naturally out of his desire to preserve his team and to realize the value of the
incredible talent that he had attracted. By the time Bill became CEO at Intuit and
led the company past the $1 billion revenue mark in 2000, he had uncovered the
Multiplier inside of him.

A Multiplier of Multipliers
Even though Bill retired as the CEO, he remained on the Intuit board and also
spent time coaching early-stage start-up companies. He played the role of mentor
—a leader who had been there before, made the mistakes, and learned from
those mistakes. He worked closely with venture capital partners to make sure
their respective roles were clear: the VCs invested and Bill grew the talent. He
assisted the CEO and the key leaders in developing the skills needed to allow the
company to grow to its market potential.
What did Bill do to cultivate the CEOs? To a great extent, he built Multipliers.
He taught what he had learned himself: “If it can be learned, it can be taught.”
He helped highly intelligent (and often young) CEOs learn how to leverage the
intelligence inside their own organizations. The CEOs he coached have
progressed to build some of technology’s most prominent companies: Amazon,
Netscape, PayPal, Google, and many more.
In 2010, Bill helped one CEO transform his executive staff meetings from
bland, functional report-out sessions to rigorous debates on the jugular business
issues. Before, the meetings had followed a predictable format: each person
around the table would give their report, informing their colleagues of progress
being made and issues within their function. Bill sat in on many of these staff
meetings and saw the underutilization of the enormous brainpower in the room.
He counseled, “You are not getting anything out of these staff meetings. You
need to engage your people on your biggest issues.” Bill asked the CEO to
prepare five topics that were crucial to the company. The CEO then emailed the
list to the team in advance and asked each person to think through each issue and
come prepared with data and opinions.
The CEO opened the next meeting by asking his management team to take
their functional hats off and put their company hats on. He then launched into
the first issue: Should we be in the services space, or should we give this
business to our partners? One executive cited the reasons they should stay in the
space. Another argued the contrary. Each team member chimed in with his and
her perspective. The CEO listened carefully, made the decision, and then
outlined the implications and actions. One team member stepped up and said,
“I’ve got it. I’ll take it from here.” The CEO then moved on to the next topic,

and the next debate ensued.
Bill reflected on his work coaching and advising some of Silicon Valley’s
rock-star CEOs: “I can help them see it differently. I kick them out of their
comfort zones, and I ask them the hard questions.”
Bill began his career as a Diminisher who told people what to do and called
every play. He then did the hard work to transform himself into a Multiplier
where he asked the hard questions that made others think. But his leadership
journey didn’t end there. Bill Campbell was not just a Multiplier; he became a
Multiplier of Multipliers, building other powerful leaders capable of extracting
and multiplying intelligence and capability. Bill passed away in April 2016 after
a long battle with cancer, but not before making an enormous impact. His
biggest legacy in Silicon Valley was as a behind-the-scenes mentor to scores of
its most important executives. Scott Cook, Intuit’s cofounder, said the company
wouldn’t be what it is today without Campbell. “I don’t think anyone had an
impact as important and far-reaching on Silicon Valley’s leaders and culture,”
Cook said. “He made us all better.”
Bill’s journey from Diminisher to Multiplier of Multipliers, which is similar to
those of other leaders we studied, raises a number of questions. Can someone
with Diminisher roots become a Multiplier? Can the transition be authentic?
Does this journey happen passively, simply through accruing over time the
wisdom that comes from maturity, or can it be accelerated through active effort?
In this chapter we address these questions and explore the journey of
becoming a Multiplier. We’ll offer examples of leaders who have made the
transition, and we provide you with a framework and a set of tools to help you
both lead more like a Multiplier and build a Multiplier culture around you.

Resonance, Realization, and Resolve
As various people have heard these ideas and read this book, I have observed a
nearly universal three-step reaction:
1. RESONANCE. We hear from people everywhere that the distinction between

Diminishers and Multipliers resonates deeply with them. Many say, “Yes, I have
worked for that manager.” They have seen diminishing in action (and/or

multiplying), and it vividly describes the realities of the business world.
Virtually all readers have
confessed that they see some degree of diminishing behaviors in themselves. For
some, there are only trace amounts. For others, there is a chronic pattern of
behavior. They realize that their well-meaning management practices are, in all
probability, having a diminishing effect on the people they work with.
2. REALIZATION OF THE ACCIDENTAL DIMINISHER.

After identifying their own diminishing
tendencies, they have a genuine desire to become more of a Multiplier. Their
conviction builds, but they are often overwhelmed by the Multiplier standard and
the apparent magnitude of the task of achieving it.
Insight and resolve are a start, but they aren’t sufficient to sustain oneself on
the journey to Multiplier leadership. To effect operational change, a path must be
forged between your personal insight and the impact you seek to have on others:
a path paved with action—small steps in the right direction—and successive
wins to deepen commitment.
And there’s a second challenge. While we may personally aspire to being a
Multiplier, few of us are the sole leader of our enterprise. When it comes to
leading, most of us have other leaders with whom we work and coexist, who
either aid or interfere with our new habits and our best attempts to create a
hospitable work environment. How do you take other leaders with you or help
the unaware leader realize the downside of their diminishing ways?
We’ll address these twin challenges: 1) how can we advance from insight to
impact? and 2) how can we inspire collective insight and action and create an
entire Multiplier culture?
3. RESOLVE TO BE A MULTIPLIER.

Becoming a Multiplier
From examples such as Bill Campbell and countless others, I’ve seen that
Multiplier practices can be learned and developed. Some people will stumble in
this direction, over time, on their own, but with the right approach the learning
can be accelerated. The following five accelerators are proven fast-track
practices—both for arriving sooner and for staying longer.

Accelerator No. 1: Start with the Assumptions
To score a strike in tenpin bowling, you need to hit the headpin. Hitting the
headpin directly will knock down most of the pins behind it, and hitting it in just
the right place, a little to the left or right, pretty much guarantees that all the pins
will come tumbling down in a single strike. The assumptions of a Multiplier are
the headpin. Because behavior follows assumptions, you can knock out a whole
set of behaviors by adopting a Multiplier mindset.
Consider the following scenario and how you might approach it with either
Diminisher or Multiplier assumptions:
Another executive has asked that you appoint someone from your division
as a representative on a cross-divisional task force that will assess the
company’s competitive position and recommend changes to the current
marketing programs. You decide to put Jyanthi on the task force and plan
to use a one-on-one meeting to tee up the assignment.
WITH DIMINISHER ASSUMPTIONS: People will never figure this out without me.

With this assumption, you would probably approach this meeting using Jyanthi
as your representative, your eyes and ears into the project. She’ll attend the
meetings, gather information, and then report back, so you can weigh in on the
issues.
What is the result of this approach? Jyanthi spends a lot of time attending
meetings but contributes very little to the task force. She is careful not to
overstep her role, so she passes up opportunities to speak out and steers clear of
any controversial issues where she might be called on to influence a decision.

Eventually, you hear through the grapevine that the task force leader commented
on the lack of engagement from your division.
WITH MULTIPLIER ASSUMPTIONS: People are smart and can figure it out. You let

Jyanthi know that you chose her for her understanding of the market and ability
to assimilate the vast amounts of market data that the task force is assembling.
You acknowledge that you are giving her a big job, as she will be representing
the entire division and be fully responsible for implementing the task force’s
outcomes. You might recommend that she come to meetings armed with data so
she can weigh in on the issues and think on her feet during the debates. You
would let her know that this task force is her project, but that you are available
as a sounding board if she wants to think through the issues jointly.
What is the result of this approach? Jyanthi engages fully in the task force,
gains new understanding of the competitive landscape, and advocates for
marketing programs that will have immediate benefit for your division. She
impresses the task force leader, who thinks, This group has great talent.
The assumptions we hold shape our views and practices and, in the end, have
a powerful effect on outcomes (often by being self-fulfilling prophecies). If you
want to apply Multiplier skills and behaviors naturally and instinctively, try on
the Multiplier Assumptions below and see how they guide your actions.

CORE ASSUMPTIONS

Accelerator No. 2: Work the Extremes
In 2002, Jack Zenger and Joe Folkman published a set of fascinating research
findings in their book The Extraordinary Leader.1 They studied 360-degree
assessment data for eight thousand leaders, looking for what differentiated the
extraordinary leaders from the average leaders. They found that leaders who
were perceived as having no distinguishing strengths were rated at the thirtyfourth percentile of effectiveness of all leaders in the study. However, when a
leader was perceived as having just one distinguishing strength, his or her
effectiveness shot to the sixty-fourth percentile. Having one towering strength
almost doubled the effectiveness of the leader, provided the leader had no area of
sharp weakness. Leaders with two, three, and four strengths jumped to the
seventy-second, eighty-first, and eighty-ninth percentile respectively. The
Zenger-Folkman study demonstrates that leaders do not need to be good at
everything. They need to have mastery of a small number of skills and be free of
showstopping weaknesses.
What this implies for someone aspiring to lead like a Multiplier is that you do
not need to excel at each of the Multiplier disciplines and master every practice.
As we studied Multipliers, we noticed that each individual Multiplier wasn’t

necessarily, or even typically, strong in all five disciplines. The majority of
Multipliers were strong in just three. There were many who were strong in four
or even all five, but having strength in three of the disciplines appears to be a
threshold for Multiplier status. We also noticed that these Multipliers were rarely
in the Diminisher range in any of the five disciplines. A leader does not have to
be exceptional in all five disciplines to be considered a Multiplier. A leader
needs two or three strong disciplines and the others can be just good enough.
Instead of trying to develop strength in all five disciplines, an aspiring
Multiplier should set an extreme development plan. Begin by assessing your
leadership practices and then work the two extremes: 1) neutralize a weakness;
2) top off a strength.
NEUTRALIZE A WEAKNESS. A common misconception in executive coaching is

that coaching or development can—or even should—turn your weaknesses into
strengths. Clients have often told me, “I’m terrible at this, and I need to become
really great at it.” I suggest to them that, while not impossible, it is unlikely they
will turn their biggest weaknesses into their biggest strengths. The truth is that
you do not need to be fabulous at everything. You just can’t be bad. You need to
neutralize the weakness and move it into the middle, acceptable zone. Having
realistic goals frees up capacity to do the more important development work:
turning your modest strengths into towering strengths.
TOP OFF A STRENGTH. As Zenger and Folkman and many others have found,

leaders with a small number of strengths are viewed more highly than leaders
who have a broad base of capabilities. Of the five disciplines, identify your
strongest area and then build a deep and broad repertoire of practices that allows
you to excel at this discipline. Become a world-class Challenger or a resounding
Talent Magnet. Invest your energy wisely and progress from good to great by
topping off one of your strengths. The following chart illustrates these two
development strategies:

WORKING THE EXTREMES
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY

Based on our research, we’ve developed a multirater assessment tool, which
you can access at www.multipliersbooks.com. Taking this 360-degree
assessment will get you started in identifying your relative strengths along the
Diminisher–Multiplier continuum. When reviewing your report, look for your
extremes. Which discipline is your strongest? Are any disciplines dangerously
within Diminisher territory?

Accelerator No. 3: Run an Experiment
Effective and enduring learning involves small, successive experimentation
using new approaches—testing new behavior, analyzing feedback, adjusting,
and repeating. The experiments in appendix E have been designed as starters for
the larger Multiplier disciplines. Pick an experiment from the Multiplier
discipline you aspire to, or choose an experiment to help ameliorate an
Accidental Diminisher tendency. What’s important is that you pick one (and
preferably only one) and experiment with a new approach.
When these small experiments produce successful outcomes, the resulting
energy fuels the next, slightly bigger experiment. Over time, these experiments
form new patterns of behavior that establish a new baseline. Try extending your
experiment over a thirty-day period. Why thirty days? Research published in the

European Journal of Social Psychology shows that it takes approximately sixty
days of concentrated effort to form a new habit.2 A thirty-day challenge gets you
to “halftime” and offers a chance to reflect and strategize for the second half of
new habit formation. Like any good researcher, you should record your
experiences in a journal, learning from what works and what doesn’t.
Here’s a glimpse into what happened when four leaders, and in some cases
their management teams, turned an experiment into a thirty-day challenge.
LABELING TALENT. Jack Bossidy3 was the team leader in a manufacturing plant.

He could see that some members of his team dominated meetings while others
withdrew. Curiously, the person who spoke most in the meetings was the same
person who felt most underutilized and undervalued.
Jack decided to take a thirty-day challenge and began by genius watching. He
took note of the native genius of each member of his team. In his next staff
meeting, he spoke about each person, why they were needed on the team, and
the unique capabilities they brought. He went beyond labeling each person’s
genius one-on-one and labeled it in front of the whole group. The team then
reviewed the work that needed to get done over the next quarter and determined
assignments. Although not explicitly asked of them, the team naturally ensured
each person had an assignment that demanded one or more of their unique
capabilities.
What do you suppose happened to the undervalued but overly dominating
team member? He talked less, listened more, and began to draw out the
capabilities of others. Under the leadership of an aspiring Multiplier, he went
from dominating to multiplying. He told Jack, “It feels like we are really
working as a team now.”
LIBERATING LOKESH. Christine faced a common management challenge—how to

get the most out of Lokesh, a smart but timid colleague. Lokesh always showed
deference to other people’s ideas. Instead of offering his own opinion, he would
just go with what other people recommended, giving the impression that he
didn’t have any ideas. Christine found that it was easy to dominate meetings
with Lokesh. Without meaning to, she would end up overexpressing her views
and speaking 80 percent of the time. The more she tried to rescue him, the worse

things seemed to be. The more she “mentored” Lokesh, the less he seemed to
contribute.
Christine took a thirty-day challenge and focused on being a Liberator to
Lokesh by making more space for him. She began by asking, “How is Lokesh
smart?” The question snapped her out of her more judgmental Diminisher
assumptions and put her into inquiry mode. As his abilities came into focus for
her (his years of experience and his ability to break complex activities into
actionable plans), she found it easier to ask him questions and to give him space
to answer them.
Christine noticed an immediate change. Lokesh started to offer opinions. He
spoke 50 percent or more in their interactions. He volunteered for the majority of
the action items. He stepped into the role of a creator. And within days, one of
the clients had commented to Christine about the difference. Christine
summarized her learning by saying, “The silence creates the space. The space
creates results. The results are valuable. And I have already seen a payoff!”
Gary Lovell is a Project Manager for HP Enterprise
Services in Cape Town, South Africa. When a client purchased a new business
unit that had to be integrated into their existing spend-management system, Gary
and his team were tasked with finding the best product solution for the client.
Specifically, they would need to recommend an integration strategy, considering
time and resource-related implications. This was a high-stakes decision for the
client, so Gary decided to turn to debate.
Gary needed to engage two sides of the business that normally disagreed and
get them to create an aligned, compelling solution. Naturally, he was expecting
apprehension from both the client and his technical team. Even though Gary had
a gut feeling about which solution he should present to the client, he initiated a
debate with the technical team. Throughout the debate, Gary asked each team
member to assume untypical “job” roles to hash out the pros and cons of
potential decisions. This process prompted nearly everyone to change their
initial opinion at least once.
In the end, a solution was agreed upon by all. When they presented their final
solution, the client’s IT director posed many questions not only to Gary but to
the HP technical team as well. Because they had previously dealt with those
DEBATING THE DEAL.

types of questions while “switching sides” during the debate, the entire team was
prepared. Seeing the HP team’s united front, the client’s apprehension turned to
confidence, and they moved forward with an innovative, outside-the-box
solution that secured a much larger opportunity for the company.
INVESTING IN RENEWABLE ENERGY. Gregory Pal is a thoughtful and intense MIT

graduate with an MBA from Harvard who works as a manager in an alternative
energy start-up. Gregory is known for his ability to solve complex problems. As
a reviewer of the early versions of this book, he admitted to feeling torn between
his growing desire to lead like a Multiplier and the mounting pressures he faced
at work. He found a way through his dilemma by taking on the thirty-day
challenge, with a clear and focused target in mind.
Gregory had recently hired Michael, a talented individual with rich experience
as an employee of the Brazilian embassy, but wasn’t fully utilizing him. Michael
was the only team member working remotely and was often “out of sight, out of
mind.” Michael estimated he was being utilized at 20 to 25 percent.
Gregory began the challenge by making a few simple investments. He gave
Michael full ownership for capturing their Brazilian partnership strategy on
paper for a critical board meeting. He then integrated Michael virtually into
company-wide meetings so his ideas could be heard. He touched base with him
often, but didn’t take over his work. Within just a couple of weeks, Michael said
he felt like he was being utilized at 75 to 80 percent. That represents a threefold
utilization gain!
Yet the real gain, according to Gregory, came from a slight change in
perspective. Once he started looking at the people around him through the lens
of a Multiplier, he said, opportunities started presenting themselves. Instead of
feeling frustrated at having to step in and redo work, he found ways to help other
people take their thinking to the next level. He could take charge without taking
over. He began to do things differently because he began to see his role
differently.

Accelerator No. 4: Brace Yourself for Setbacks
Moving from inspiration to impact requires addressing the original assumptions
and creating new Multiplier habits. The process is neither automatic nor

immediate. But, with sufficient know-how and a few tools, you can transform
your old assumptions into new habits.
Because the Multiplier disciplines are easy to grasp, a common trap is
thinking that implementing the ideas is as easy as understanding them. Rarely is
knowledge alone sufficient to transform into a Multiplier. Much more often,
replacing diminishing habits with Multiplier behaviors comes only through
persistence and resilience. It is therefore vital to anticipate—and create tools to
withstand—possible setbacks along the way.
After all, changing diminishing behaviors is not like knee-replacement
surgery, in which a worn-out joint is simply replaced with a new one. Desire to
transform current assumptions will not, on its own, spontaneously override old
habits. The seeds of the new Multiplier assumptions must be planted and
cultivated while the old habits are gradually uprooted.
The good news is that the part of the brain that stores consciously cultivated
new assumptions is the same part that unconsciously builds new habits.4 Yet—
and here is the kicker—until a new habit is formed (by creating new neural
pathways through consistent behavior), the subconscious will think you should
be operating in your old diminishing ways, even though those ways contradict
your new Multiplier assumptions. The danger of this difficult interim period is
that these “should” judgments will demotivate you—and might even lead you to
quit the journey before you can develop and implement your new assumptions.
There is a trick to help you get through this period. First, give yourself
permission to stumble as you cultivate new Multiplier behaviors while
transforming old habits. Know that it will be hard; you’re likely to take two steps
forward and then a step back as you develop new mindsets and skills. Using the
following strategy will help you cut yourself some slack until those habits are
fully transformed:
1. My new Multiplier assumption is [people are smart and will figure it

out], so I need to develop a new habit [giving space].
2. As I’m becoming a Multiplier, old habits will be mixed with new
assumptions.
3. Until those habits are fully uprooted, I will continue making mistakes
diminishing others by [jumping in], while I’m trying to learn to multiply

others by [giving space].
Second, share your strategy with colleagues who are likely to encourage you
along the way. If you are making a 180-degree shift, talking it out with a few
team members will reduce the freak-out factor that your changes might create—
quickly moving from diminishing behaviors to multiplying ones might be
viewed as suspect if demonstrated without warning. Further, it will help you
commit to your plan while also garnering some much-needed support at the
same time.

Accelerator No. 5: Ask a Colleague
If you really want to accelerate your development as a Multiplier leader, let a
colleague—an employee, peer, or boss—choose your experiment for you. Pick
someone who can see your Accidental Diminisher tendencies and who also
knows your good intentions. Give them the worksheet in appendix E on pages
340–42 and tell them you are choosing one new practice to help you become a
better leader. Then ask this question: If I want to bring out the best in the people
I lead, which one of the nine experiments would help me the most? But, be
warned, this step isn’t for the lackadaisical learner or accidental leader. It’s
rocket fuel for the aspiring Multiplier—it will get you there faster.
My team and I have been inspired as we witnessed senior leaders and frontline
managers around the world take experiments and become comfortable with their
new gait and rhythms. For many, merely watching their employees’ reactions
was sufficient evidence to keep them moving forward. For others, the proof
came when they realized their new approach was liberating for themselves as
well as their employees. Dave Havlek, the investor relations executive who put
his team in charge (see the Give It Back experiment on page 336), reflected,
“Suddenly the burden of me having to make every decision, every call, was
lifted. It felt good to let go, and it felt even better when the team delivered a
solid result. I am starting to feel like I don’t have to work until midnight each
night.” As Dave successfully shifted the burden of thinking to his team, they
moved faster and made smarter decisions, and Dave redefined his role as a
leader.
While the ripple effect of a single leader can be felt across an organization, no

leader leads in isolation. Each leader is part of a system, and it takes leaders at
all levels to build an environment where intelligence is deeply utilized.

Building a Multiplier Culture
Mike Felix is a strong, well-established leader with a knack for transforming
struggling businesses and teams. In 2012, after successfully leading a turnaround
in Alaska as the president of Alascom (an AT&T subsidiary), Mike was asked
by AT&T to move to the Midwest to lead almost 8,500 people in the Midwest
Internet and Entertainment Field Services division. This move was part of the
global telecommunications giant’s larger transformation to become the premier
integrated communication company in the world. To accomplish this the
company was working to build an agile workforce that could take smart
calculated risks as well as create a culture where every voice was heard and
every mind mattered.
In his new role, Mike would be responsible for leading a management staff of
seven directors, sixty-eight area managers, and almost five hundred frontline
managers. And to make this big job even bigger, the Midwest division had been
perennially in last place among the five divisions (by virtually every business
measure). It was an organization that appeared to have been chronically
overmanaged and underled.

An Awakening
Mike spent most of his first year “wandering” around the Midwest, observing
behaviors, listening to conversations, and asking questions, getting a sense for
attitudes and behaviors that were holding the team back. He made a clarion
discovery: many of the managers had been promoted because they were good
technicians but had never been taught how to lead and coach. So he created a
mentoring program where area managers could learn the new skills of leadership
and get the best, consistent performance with their teams.
A year into his assignment, Mike attended a global leadership summit where
he heard about Multipliers and, more important, about the notion that even really
good leaders can become Accidental Diminishers. As a natural leader, the idea
resonated with him; it gave him words to describe his own positive leadership
practices and also crystalized the diminishing assumptions that had been holding
his division back. It struck a chord, and it also hit a nerve. He said, “It really
challenged me. It helped me see the areas where I was an Accidental
Diminisher.” Mike read Multipliers and found ways to minimize his Accidental
Diminisher tendencies. Instead of overwhelming his staff with his vision and
energy, he would simply seed ideas and then step back and ask more questions.
He also used the Multiplier practices to offer bigger challenges and shift
ownership to others, which took his own mentoring and coaching to a new level.
No leader—even one with superior skills and exceptional self-awareness—can
transform an organization single-handedly. To turn around an 8,500-person
organization, Mike knew he needed to hone his own leadership capability, but
more important, he needed to build a broad Multiplier culture. It would require
that the more than 500 managers become better leaders and cocreate a system of
shared beliefs across the entire organization.

A Call to Action
Mike began by introducing the language of Multipliers. As a perpetual student of
leadership and organization, he understood that changing a culture meant
changing the conversation. And, to change the conversation, people would need
new words, especially words about behaviors that would lead to winning results.
Mike asked all his managers to read Multipliers and take the Accidental
Diminisher quiz (which you can find at www.multipliersquiz.com). Soon all his
managers were using the same vocabulary, especially the lexicon of the
Accidental Diminishers. They talked about being Always On and Pacesetters
and began pushing back on other’s well-meaning attempts as Rescuers and the
like. Mike said, “It gave us a common language and permission to call out
diminishing actions.”
But calling out ineffective behavior was just the beginning—they had to
define the new leadership behaviors necessary to shape a culture of trust and
high performance. Mike spent more time in the field, understanding what people
needed from their managers in order for them to perform at their best and
achieve their business goals. Mike didn’t construct an elaborate competency
model; he kept it simple, capturing the behaviors and learning progression he
expected on a piece of paper only two inches square. After several tours across
the Midwest and tens of thousands of miles of driving and flying, Mike had met
with all sixty-eight of his area managers and more than four hundred frontline
managers, discussing these winning behaviors and teaching managers how to
lead and coach the rest of the team. As Mike modeled the new leadership
approach, the directors and area managers followed. An Ohio area manager said,
“I try to teach and not tell. I ask a question, find out what they know, and then
help guide them to a solution. I try to let them be the smartest person in the
room.” While the directors and area managers were the teachers, they weren’t
the proctors. Instead of trying to catch and correct all behavioral infractions, they
encouraged and coached their teams to self-assess and adjust.
But Mike didn’t just expect the managers below them to learn new behaviors,
he himself continued to make personal leadership adjustments. For example, at
the conclusion of every town hall meeting, Mike would ask his direct reports for
feedback on his tone and any unintentional messages he might have sent. Mike

said, “People can often see where they are Multipliers, but not necessarily where
they are Diminishers. For this you need feedback, and I’m lucky to have a whole
posse of people who will give me this information.” When a group of his
managers was asked about Mike’s Accidental Diminisher tendencies, they
laughed. One said, “He’s got every one of them! But it isn’t diminishing because
he calls himself out. He says, ‘Maybe I approached that wrong.’ It doesn’t matter
if it is in a small group or on a conference call with four thousand people, he’ll
say he got it wrong.” A Chicago area manager said, “It means we aren’t afraid to
make mistakes or make decisions on our own. If we fail, we try to fail fast and
move on.”
After coming to a clear consensus on the behaviors allowed, Mike and his
team stood ready to make up-front people decisions. Key leadership decisions
were made with a clear principle that Mike had established: “Past results don’t
predict future results; actually past behavior predicts future behavior, which then
drives future results.” Leaders who exhibited the right mindsets and behavior
were pulled up, while some who could not make the transition were moved out.
Mike and his leadership team made a point of reaching into the organization and
shining a spotlight on good leadership. For example, one frontline manager, who
created a game show to reinforce the importance of safety, became a bit of a
local hero. He and other new heroes became role models, giving the larger
organization a chance to tell new stories and build new success beliefs.
Innovative action sprang up across the organization.
Mike and his team could see the need to increase trust. People needed to know
they were trusted and, in turn, could trust their management to have their best
interests at heart. Mike could have preached the trust message and conducted
seminars on trust, governing from a closed office and dispatching staff people to
look for signs of noncompliance. Instead, Mike and his management team
started to build trust by extending trust to employees and by asking a lot more
questions. They weren’t interrogating, gotcha questions; they were sincere
questions, the ones that say, I want to know what you think, and why. They were
questions that conveyed the message that I trust you. It wasn’t a blind faith that I
trust you to get it right; it was a more deeply held confidence that I trust you to
learn how to get it right. As the managers consistently asked questions, the
technicians and the staff got the message: they were expected to think for

themselves, and they would be allowed to recover from mistakes.

A Common Culture
New beliefs are initially tenuous and need reinforcement and validation to
become inculcated and deeply rooted. Mike and his team created visible
programs to celebrate and share progress. For example, area managers whose
organizations were accident free for an entire quarter were awarded a Circle of
Safety coat—a reminder to the whole team that the safety of the team mattered
as much as financial and operational targets. The mentoring program that Mike
established became a regular monthly practice. To no surprise, Mike still speaks
to every class and makes sure they all know that Multipliers is first up on the
reading list. He talks about his own Accidental Diminisher tendencies and
encourages others to do the same. Talking about a manager’s vulnerabilities had
previously been the subject of furtive, closed-door conversations; now it is out in
the open and a breath of fresh air. Three years ago, the idea of manager as genius
maker was novel. Today it’s the new normal, just part of how things work there.
By the end of 2015, just three years after Mike Felix took the helm, AT&T’s
Midwest IEFS division was on its way to winning its third consecutive JD Power
Award for Customer Satisfaction with U-verse TV service, finishing with the
best financial performance among the five divisions, and, in any given month,
was in the number one or number two position in operational metrics. It was a
journey from perennially last to definitively first. Mike’s mentees nominated
him for the 2015 Multiplier of the Year contest and cheered him on to become
one of the finalists.
Mike didn’t just change himself; he changed an entire culture. While it started
with a singular, sudden insight, he achieved sustained impact by building a
culture—a common language, a system of shared assumptions, and a set of
norms about the way to win collectively and to continually get smarter and more
capable.
If you want to build a brilliant organization, don’t just settle for your own aha
moment: build a Multiplier culture, one that generates Multiplier moments every
day and between everyone in the organization.

Cultivating Growth
So, how do you build a Multiplier culture—an environment where the mindsets
and the practices of Multipliers are shared and the new normal? To begin
developing new cultural norms, we must understand what culture is and how a
strong culture is formed. Let’s start with the classic definitions of culture. From
the anthropological perspective, culture is “the beliefs, customs, arts, etc., of a
particular society, group, place or time.” From the business perspective, culture
is “a way of thinking, behaving, or working that exists in a place or
organization.”5 Strong cultures typically exhibit the following traits:
Common language: Words and phrases that hold a common meaning
within a community based on opinions, principles, and values6
Learned behaviors: A set of learned responses to stimuli7
Shared beliefs: The acceptance of something as true8
Heroes and legends: People who are admired or idealized for their
qualities, behavior, and/or achievements and the stories told about their
heroic actions9
Rituals and norms: Consistent behavior regularly followed by an
individual or a group10
Consider a powerful culture where these elements work together to shape new
behavior and produce positive outcomes. Alcoholics Anonymous is a mutual aid
fellowship of more than 2 million people in 170 countries whose primary
purpose is to help alcoholics “stay sober and help other alcoholics achieve
sobriety.” Though AA has no governing body and is a globally dispersed,
loosely connected fellowship, it maintains a strong culture throughout. No matter
where you attend an AA meeting, your experience will be consistent. Why is
that?
In AA, members exhibit common language through references to the Big
Book, the Twelve Steps, and the Twelve Traditions. They hold shared beliefs,
like admitting that they are powerless over alcohol and need help from a “higher
power.” In AA, people combat alcoholism through a number of learned
behaviors: one way is by building accountability through attending meetings and

talking regularly with a sponsor. In AA, each person becomes a hero because
they all share their stories with each other—and by telling their stories, they help
both themselves and others with their sobriety; they create legends. Some of the
rituals of Alcoholics Anonymous include regular meeting attendance, saying
specific prayers together, and the well-known introduction, “Hi, my name is
[Oliver], and I am an alcoholic.”
Regardless of what any of us think about AA, we can universally
acknowledge that its culture is powerful. Culture is powerful because it redirects
and shapes our behavior; its forces overpower individual intent and reject
individual behaviors that are not acceptable or normative. In AA, any type of
person can show up and belong, but the culture mandates that if that person
hinders the group from fulfilling its primary purpose, he or she will no longer be
welcome. Plato offers this insight: “The overwhelming majority of individuals
will prove incapable of resisting the voice of the culture that surrounds them: in
the typical case, their values, their beliefs, indeed, their very perceptions will
tend to mirror those of the surrounding culture.”11

Diving into the Deep
Most companies and their leaders recognize the need to rid their organizations of
old, unproductive habits and to introduce new behaviors more fit for the future
needs of the organization. Attempting to build new norms, these well-meaning
companies expose their management ranks to new ideas, often through keynote
speeches, generally giving little thought to integrating the new practices into the
daily working of the business or operation. These efforts seek to inspire,
assuming that the epiphany will generate the momentum required to counteract
the gravitational pull of current practices and status quo thinking. But there is a
short shelf life on inspiration without action.
While introducing ideas and generating conversation is a good start, it doesn’t
go far enough. It is much like when a patient begins taking a prescribed course
of antibiotics and fails to complete the full course of treatment, thus running the
risk that the bacteria will survive, mutate, and become resistant. Similarly,
incomplete attempts to introduce a new culture cannot only fail to produce
results but can also cause residual resentment that can become resistant to future
initiatives.
A rapidly growing software company became intrigued with Multipliers as a
key to their growth, innovation, and talent retention strategy. Managers were
asked to read the book and inject its concepts into their management and new
hire training programs. Quickly, talk of Multipliers, Diminishers, and Accidental
Diminishers was heard in the halls of the workspace and between the walls of
conference rooms. Known Diminishers were exposed, and would-be Multipliers
were inspired. However, when the company hit a few bumps on their growth
curve, many managers retreated to their default style—not because it was better
but simply because it was easier. As the company returned to steady growth,
they realized they had lost sight of their aspirations. Today they are regrouping
and recommitting to build and sustain a true Multiplier culture. This time, they
aren’t just starting a conversation, they are building deep internal capability to
teach the ideas and integrate them into their talent and performance management
practices.
Building a culture is neither a one-time injection nor a sheep dip; it requires
connection to the deep layers of the culture—it necessitates going from surface-

level cultural elements (such as shared language and behavior) to affect the
deeper cultural elements (such as rituals and norms), as the chart below
illustrates.

LAYERS OF CULTURE

Engaging in the surface-level practices is like dipping your toe into a pool of
water—feeling the temperature of the water but skimming the surface. As your
organization engages in the deeper practices, surface-level insights become
deeply embedded beliefs and new behaviors are routinized into standard
operating practices. When new ideas become new norms, you have cultivated a
sustainable culture.

Building Deep Culture
How do you create new norms? This section offers a set of practices that will
assist you in building the essential elements of culture (see the chart below),
starting from surface-level elements like creating a shared language to deeper
practices such as integrating Multiplier behaviors into manager assessment and
hiring practices.
Each practice is illustrated with an example of how one company is putting
this strategy to work. In most cases, these companies are deploying a number of
practices; however, only a small sample of the larger work they are engaged in is
highlighted below.

10 PRACTICES TO BUILD A MULTIPLIER CULTURE

Cultural Element

Multiplier Practice

Common Language

1. Hold a book talk
2. Discuss Accidental Diminishers

Learned Behavior

3. Introduce Multiplier mindsets
4. Teach Multiplier skills
5. Fuse Multipliers with daily decisions

Shared
Beliefs

6. Codify a leadership ethos

Heroes &
Legends

7. Spotlight Multiplier moments
8. Measure managers

Rituals &
Norms

9. Pilot a Multiplier practice

10. Integrate practices with
business metrics

Common Language
When a group shares a common vocabulary, they can more easily name
desirable and undesirable behaviors that would otherwise be slippery or
invisible. Many leadership models name desirable behaviors but fail to spark
discussion about undesirable behaviors. Having a common vocabulary gives
people the chance to talk about diminishing, which is a discussion that all too
often exists only in shrouded conversations and hushed tones. To strengthen a
culture, create a safe space for people to talk about leadership—not just in
theoretical, aspirational terms but also in real daily experiences and interactions.
Use either of the two practices below to help people name and express what is
working and not working for them and their colleagues.
PRACTICE 1: Hold a book talk. Ryan Sanders, the COO of Bamboo HR, a rapidly

growing software-as-a-service company, introduced Multipliers to his company.
He went in highly cognizant of two principles that he learned from managing
triple-digit growth. First, underperformers could easily hide in high-growth
companies. Second, bad management and lack of leadership development
compound the problem. He began his leadership development efforts by having
his senior leadership team read this book and discuss the need for Multiplier
leadership across their growing business in a series of weekly staff meetings.
PRACTICE 2: Discuss Accidental Diminishers. In addition to discussing the ideas

in the book, the senior leaders at Bamboo HR each took the Accidental
Diminisher quiz and compared their self-assessments. The conversations were
real and vulnerable, with team members confronting each other’s diminishing
behaviors and lauding their Multiplier moments. Tears weren’t uncommon.
While many companies start the dialogue, this management team kept it going,
creating a comfortable space to call each other out on diminishing behaviors and
work together to replace those behaviors with multiplying practices. Their
collective point of view allowed them to lead a cultural transformation and
increase their retention of top talent. Most important, the conversation continues
within all ranks of the company.

Learned Behavior
When we watch our boss or another successful leader micromanage in highstakes situations, we are learning “appropriate” behavior and are likely to default
to this behavior when presented with a similar situation. The behavior becomes
naturalized or unconscious. To acquire a set of new learned behaviors, people
must move from unaware Diminisher to automatic Multiplier, as summarized in
the following chart.12

SHIFTING FROM UNAWARE
DIMINISHER TO AUTOMATIC
MULTIPLIER

Initially, people need to discover the downside of an old, negative behavior.
Once they understand the downside, they need to learn to spot the triggers, the
situations that bait and activate diminishing responses. Once they’ve been
introduced to new Multiplier behaviors, they need to experiment with those

behaviors and experience success. However, to make that behavior permanent,
our response to the stimulus needs to become habituated or automatic. The
following practices can help managers unlearn diminishing behaviors and spot
opportunities to replace them with Multiplier practices.
PRACTICE 3: Introduce Multiplier mindsets. Mike Felix, the leader described

earlier, wasn’t an anomaly; his actions were part of a larger movement across
AT&T. As employees of a large company know, it’s easy to be underutilized
inside big companies, becoming lost in red tape, political silos, and corporate
structure. In AT&T’s quest to become the world’s premier integrated
communications company, they needed a better way to tap into intelligence
inside the company and to create a culture of trust and transparency where
people could speak up. And they needed a fresh and efficient way to reach more
than 100,000 leaders. AT&T began their efforts to flatten the hierarchy by
starting at the top. Under the direction of their CEO, AT&T University held a
series of seminars for the 150 company officers. The seminars introduced the
Multipliers mindsets and practices and prompted conversation among the senior
leaders—not about what they wanted leaders below them to do (as is all too
common inside corporations) but about their own vulnerabilities as Accidental
Diminishers. The new framework became a powerful lens to view how leaders
with positive intent could have negative effects and how hidden mindsets shape
both action and outcome.
As senior officers experimented with Multiplier practices, others in the
organization took notice, witnessing how seemingly small shifts in behavior
could have major impact. For example, Brooks McCorcle, the president of
AT&T Partner Solutions, had such a positive experience with “playing fewer
chips” (see page 322) that managers throughout her team began trying their hand
with the exercise. While AT&T’s effort began at the top of the organization, it
didn’t stop there. AT&T University distributed a copy of the book to all 6,700
general managers and then held a Multipliers webinar viewed by over 125,000
leaders worldwide (roughly 46 percent of their overall employee population).
Along with the webinar came a forty-eight-page discussion guide encouraging
managers to convert ideas into daily business practices.
While the effort certainly hasn’t eradicated all diminishing behavior or all

Diminishers, it has established a collective ambition and introduced ways of
working that are reducing hesitation and dismantling hierarchy. Employees are
more likely to hear their managers asking questions, listening, and saying things
such as “There is no one right answer here” or “What’s on your mind?” or “Let’s
jump on a call and debate this.” One senior leader made a point of giving his
more junior managers greater access to company officers (who often get
shielded from ideas-in-process). The junior managers, sensing the trust being
placed in them, put more rigor into their thinking, not less. But they also weren’t
afraid to suggest something seemingly outrageous. The senior leader said, “This
flatter, more collaborative style is a much faster operating model.”
People also feel greater permission to call out well-intentioned yet
diminishing behaviors. For example, when an overly eager colleague was
dominating a conversation, someone else jumped in with a lighthearted “Whoa,
slow down, cowboy.” The message was sent quickly and humorously rather than
festering or getting queued for inclusion in an annual performance review. Just
as we saw with Mike Felix’s organization, when managers learn to recognize the
triggers for diminishing behavior and turn these into Multiplier moments, the
Multiplier way of leading becomes normalized.
Teach Multiplier skills. To develop the talent and innovation
necessary to transform from a commodity-based business to a specialty chemical
company, Eastman Chemical held a series of immersive two-day leadership
workshops under the direction of Mark Hecht, a seasoned executive coach inside
the company. The workshops introduced the Multipliers framework and taught
only the Multiplier practices that supported their business objectives. In addition
to teaching skills, they utilized a 360-degree assessment to provide data to
enable the leaders to recognize their blind spots and monitor their progress.
Some leaders took it a step further in skill development by adding “Multiplier
Moments” to their natural team meeting agenda to assist leaders in sharing
pivotal moments when they could turn diminishing actions into opportunities to
magnify the best in their employees.
PRACTICE 4:

PRACTICE 5: Fuse Multipliers with daily decisions. The Multipliers framework fit

nicely with Intuit’s business values, but the company wanted to ensure that ideas
would translate from training-room scenarios to real-time business decisions in

the leaders’ daily practice. Instead of just teaching skills, they used a business
leadership simulation from the consulting firm BTS. In the simulation, teams
managed a fictitious business modeled after Intuit, and faced a series of strategic
and tactical decisions wherein they had to choose the actions that would both
deliver the desired business results while simultaneously utilizing and
multiplying the company talent. As the teams played through the simulation,
leaders learned how to approach the most difficult business problems with a
Multiplier mindset and behaviors. When they were faced with similar business
decisions back on the job, they understood the trade-offs and were prepared to
lead as a Multiplier.

Shared Beliefs
In a strong culture, people not only share a set of beliefs about what is true,
they also share a set of assumptions about how the world works. The peaks and
perimeters are clearly defined—members know what conduct earns someone
hero status and what conduct gets someone kicked out of the tribe. In a
Multiplier culture there is clarity on what constitutes good leadership, and people
who behave in ways that are congruent with the leadership ethos rise to the top.
Each time people who uphold the beliefs are rewarded, the culture is
strengthened; likewise, every time diminishing behavior is overlooked, that
culture is diluted. To build a strong culture, define the core beliefs about
leadership and ensure those beliefs are validated more frequently than they are
violated.
Codify a leadership ethos. In 2011, Nike, the global athletic
powerhouse, was bolstering their efforts to build a strong, sustaining
management culture. The company analyzed the leadership required to support
their global growth and established a manager Manifesto, a code from CEO
Mark Parker that defined the purpose and standards of excellence for managers
across Nike. With the concept of Multipliers as a cornerstone, this code defined
Nike’s expectations for managers: Managers who extract and extend the genius
of others get vastly more from their people. They are a force to multiply team
performance and fuel business growth through leading, coaching, driving, and
inspiring their teams. This manifesto sounded a clarion call to all managers:
Your job is to unleash the full potential of each person on your team.
PRACTICE 6:

Heroes And Legends
Individuals who embody sought-after leadership values can be powerful role
models, propelling hopeful or even reluctant managers forward. Not only can
these leaders have a contagious effect on the organization, they can become
cultural legends, leaving a lasting imprint long after they’ve left the
organization. The heroes in a Multiplier culture might be those truly inspiring
leaders who exemplify Multiplier mindsets and practices. However, your most
powerful role models just may be the aspiring Multipliers—the leaders who
earnestly seek to understand and confront their own diminishing ways.
Dawn Cunningham is a leader who has become legendary at 3M. After
attending the 3M Amplify program, Dawn (who runs the Customer Insights
function) embarked on a mission to redeem herself from her Accidental
Diminisher tendencies, even phoning former colleagues to apologize for past
actions that she now understood to be diminishing. She made such an impression
on her colleagues that she was invited to speak to the company’s top one
hundred executives. Courageously, she shared her self-assessment and
challenged the top executives to consider how their best intentions might be
stifling the innovation they so earnestly sought.
PRACTICE 7: Spotlight Multiplier moments. When Casey Lehner, senior director
of Design Operations at Nike, won the Multiplier of the Year contest13 in 2012,

Nike went all-out. The company made an internal announcement and held an
awards ceremony at company headquarters, during which Lehner’s staff spoke
ebulliently about working for her. One said, “She believes we are capable, so we
believe we are capable.” Following the tribute, her colleagues presented her with
a custom pair of sneakers designed and produced in her honor. You don’t need
to wait until someone from your company earns an award; you can spotlight
leaders inside your company for exemplifying Multiplier leadership. Make
heroes out of these genius makers who bring out the best in others.
PRACTICE 8: Measure managers. Companies can reinforce Multiplier practices

by periodically but regularly assessing how well managers incorporate
Multiplier behaviors into their daily leadership practices. After all, as the adage
goes, what gets measured gets done. Some companies use the Multipliers 360-

degree assesssment as one of a suite of management assessments. Other
companies incorporate the behaviors into their existing manager assessments.
For example, Nike invites employees to rate their managers once a year against a
set of eight habits of winning managers based on the Multipliers practices. NBN,
an Australian broadband network provider, mapped the Multipliers practices to
their core leadership competencies and use a 180-degree assessment tool to
measure their managers. This data is not only incorporated into their midyear
performance reviews but also aggregated into a company-wide heat map
revealing the collective strengths and vulnerabilities of their leaders.

Rituals And Norms
The Multiplier way of leading becomes institutionalized as you integrate its
disciplines into operational practices of the organization, such as performance
management, talent planning, and financial incentives. What was once
experimental, and perhaps even went against the grain, becomes an integral part
of the fabric of the organization. The following two practices can normalize once
novel ideas.
PRACTICE 9: Pilot a Multiplier practice. Chris Fry, formerly the senior vice

president of product development at Salesforce, held a two-day Multipliers
workshop for his management team. At the conclusion of the workshop, Chris
suggested his team focus their efforts by putting just a single idea into practice.
He offered this challenge to the group: “I want us to get 1 percent better across
the whole team.” Aiming to promote free movement and growth of talent inside
the company, the team focused on the Talent Magnet discipline. They
established a guiding principle: It should be easier to transfer inside the company
than to pursue an opportunity outside the company. They sketched out a new
transfer policy called “opportunity open market” that allowed software
developers to transfer to new teams after each quarterly release in their agile
product development cycle. After each release they held an internal job fair that
advertised internal opportunities. Existing managers were not allowed to veto
transfers, which offered individuals the opportunity to move freely inside the
company. The pilot was so successful and popular with employees (and
managers) that the program was implemented across the broader company.
PRACTICE 10: Integrate practices with business metrics. When Rick de Rijk of the

Dutch consultancy firm Leadership Natives was working on a leadership
development program with the global bank ABN AMRO, they went beyond a
set of competencies and training programs. They began by correlating the
Multiplier traits with the new leadership language that had been defined by ABN
AMRO. Finding a 96 percent overlap, Multipliers became their new training
method to achieve their desired leadership language. In training programs,
participants created a business leadership plan that connected the Multiplier
behavior with their business impact goals and Key Performance Indicators.

These business leadership plans were then tied to the corporate strategy to
establish clear lines of sight between the most critical business metrics and the
leadership behavior that would enable these outcomes. When the impact of their
pilot program was measured, they found a 163 percent return on investment.14
The practices described above are by no means an exhaustive list or a onesize-fits-all program. They are offered as examples of purposeful action taken to
imbue a set of mindsets and practices into an organization, which can permeate
the surface layer of culture and create a strong foundation for an intelligent
organization—one that isn’t just an aggregation of smart people but a team with
collective brilliance.

Building Momentum
It is a commonly held belief that change, especially cultural change, must start at
the top—and with the top executives. While it is prudent for cultural norms to
cascade from the top (as is the case at AT&T), it isn’t the only strategy. My
colleagues and I have noticed that most successful implementations typically
start in the middle. Here’s why. When middle managers experiment with the
Multipliers mindsets and practices inside their organizations, they produce
pockets of success—anomalies that catch the attention of senior executives and
corporate staffers who are highly adept at detecting variances (both negative and
positive). When senior executives notice positive outcomes, they are quick to
elevate and endorse the new practices, in turn spreading the practices to other
parts of the organization. In other words, most senior executives are adept at
spotting a parade and getting in front of it! (Incidentally, this is one of several
executive skills you won’t find documented on any official leadership
competency model.)
If you don’t yet have the political capital to lead a company-wide initiative,
run a pilot with a few rising middle managers. Shine a spotlight on their success
and let the practices spread to their peers. Expose their good work to the
executive team and make yourself available to turn the parade into a movement.
Whatever starting point you choose is inconsequential compared to how you
will sustain the momentum you’ve generated. Unfortunately, most new
initiatives—be they corporate change initiatives or personal improvement plans
—begin with a bang but fizzle out in what I call “the failure to launch” cycle
depicted in the following chart.15 Instead, start small and build a series of
successive wins. As illustrated in the next chart, each win provides the energy
needed to carry the work into the next phase. These series of wins generate the
energy and collective will needed to complete the cycle of success. As that cycle
spins, nascent beliefs become more deeply entrenched and old survival strategies
get supplanted by new methods to not just survive but thrive inside the
organization.
Lastly, you can also draw on the power of community as a way to spark and
sustain momentum, especially when you encounter setbacks. As like-minded
leaders gather in tribes, they create a safe space to experiment with new practices

and incubate the successes that can grow into cultural legends. A tribe can also
provide the positive peer pressure to sustain momentum. The most successful
participants of the thirty-day challenge worked collectively or had a partner who
served as both a sounding board and accountability point.

FAILURE TO LAUNCH VERSUS A
SUCCESS CYCLE

FAILURE TO LAUNCH

SUCCESS CYCLE
You might start small by finding a couple of colleagues or friends who read
this book and want to take the challenge. You might then create an online
learning community. Or you may choose to join a community of leaders around
the world who aspire to lead like a Multiplier. By joining forces with a
community, you need not have all the answers—or even all the questions. You
can look to the genius of the group to guide you.

The Multiplier Effect Revisited
When my colleagues and I teach the Multiplier ideas to teams and organizations,
we often ask our classes, “Does any of this matter?” How does leading like a
Multiplier matter to you, to your organization, or even to the world at large? Let
us consider each in turn.
First, it matters to you because people will give you more. My research
showed consistently that even high-performing people gave Multipliers 2× more
than they gave their Diminisher counterparts. People don’t give a little more;
they give a lot more. They give all of their discretionary effort and mental
energy. They dig deep and access reserves of brainpower that they may not even
know exist. They apply the full measure of their intelligence. They reason more
clearly, comprehend more completely, and learn more quickly. In the process
they get smarter and more capable.
Your people will give you more, and in return they get a richly satisfying
experience. “Exhausting but exhilarating” captures what people continually told
us it was like to work for a Multiplier. One woman said, “It was exhausting, but
I was always ready to do it again. It is not a burnout experience—it is a buildup
experience.” As you become more of a Multiplier, people will flock to you
because you will be “the boss to work for.” You will become a Talent Magnet,
attracting and developing talent while providing extraordinary returns to the
company as well as to your direct reports.
Second, it matters to the organization you work for. Many organizations face
the double whammy of new challenges and insufficient resources. Perhaps you
can relate to one start-up that experienced years of extraordinary growth. Their
strategy had been to “throw people at the problem.” But, as their growth
declined, they had to try to outperform their market without adding headcount.
Suddenly resource leverage was as strategically important as resource allocation.
A leader in a Fortune 500 company recently shared with us that in one particular
division, one in three of his people was utilized below the 20 percent level!
Organizations led by Multipliers can more than double the capability of their
people and hence their organizations.
This is a particularly timely message. In down markets and times of scarcity,

managers seek ways to get increased capability and productivity from current
resources. Corporations and organizations need managers who can migrate from
the logic of addition, where more resources are required to handle the increased
demands, to the logic of multiplication, where leaders can more fully extract
capability from their current resources. Resource leverage has the power of
relevancy: it is timely, and it is also timeless.
It is timeless because even in times of abundance and growth, companies need
leaders capable of multiplying the intelligence and capability of their colleagues
and increasing the brainpower of the organization to support growth demands. In
down markets or growth markets, leading like a Multiplier matters to the
organization you work for.
Third, leading like a Multiplier matters to the world at large. Albert Einstein is
credited with saying, “The significant problems we face cannot be solved at the
same level of thinking we were at when we created them.” What if we could
access twice the levels of available intelligence and channel it to our perennial
problems? What solutions could be generated if we could access the
underutilized brainpower in the world? Surely we need leaders who can extract
and utilize all available intelligence to solve our most complex and vital
challenges. We need more than just geniuses at the top of our organizations; we
need genius makers.

Genius or Genius Maker?
When Philippe Petit illegally connected a tightrope wire between the 1,368-foot
Twin Towers in New York City, he still had the chance to change his mind. The
moment of truth came later, when he stood with one foot perched on the building
and another on the wire in front of him. The wire was bouncing up and down
from the airflow between the buildings; his weight was still on his back leg.
Recall how Petit described that critical moment as he stood on the edge
overlooking the chasm: “I had to make a decision of shifting my weight from
one foot anchored to the building to the foot anchored on the wire. Something I
could not resist called me [out] on that cable.” He shifted his weight and took the
first step.
At the conclusion of this book, you may feel like Petit, with one foot anchored

to the building of the status quo and the other anchored to the wire of change.
You can remove your foot from the wire, lean back, and continue to lead the
way you have in the past. Or you can shift your weight onto the wire and lead
more like a Multiplier. Inertia will keep you on the building, where it is
comfortable and safe. But for many of us there is also a force pulling us out onto
the wire and to a more impactful and fulfilling way of leading others.
Leading like a Multiplier is a choice we encounter daily or perhaps in every
moment. What choices are you making? How will these choices affect what the
people around you become? Is it possible that the choice you make about how
you lead can impact not just your team, or even your immediate sphere of
influence, but generations to come? A single Accidental Diminisher turned
Multiplier can have a profound and far-reaching impact in a world where the
challenges are great and full intelligence underutilized.
It seems possible that there are Diminisher assumptions holding whole
businesses back. What could happen if one aspiring Multiplier introduced people
around them to these ideas? What would happen if an organization currently
operating on 50 percent of its intelligence moved to 100 percent? When
Accidental Diminishers become Multipliers, they are like Sir Galahad, whose
“strength was as the strength of ten.” This is because Multipliers are the key to
everyone else’s intelligence. A Multiplier is the key to unlocking capability. A
single Multiplier matters.
It is plausible that Diminisher assumptions are underlying failing schools.
What would transpire at one school if one principal learned to lead like a
Multiplier and found a way to give teachers, parents, and students greater
ownership for the success of the school? What if these students and teachers
learned and adopted these new assumptions together? How would families be
transformed if parents led like Multipliers in their homes?
Many governments are suffocating, even collapsing. Is it possible for our civic
leaders to seed challenges and then turn to the community for answers? Could
answers to our most vexing challenges be found through rigorous debate and the
extraction of the full intelligence of the community? Could Diminishing leaders
be replaced by true Multipliers, inspiring collective intelligence and capability
on a mass scale?
I believe that the diminishing cultures we see in organizations, schools, and

even families are not inevitable. Indeed, in the last analysis, diminishing cultures
may simply be unsustainable. To the extent that these cultures are based on
incorrect assumptions, they violate the truth about how people work and thrive.
Like many historical empires, they will eventually collapse. It may be that the
only institutions left standing in turbulent times are those that know how to
harvest the abundance of intelligence available and operate on Multiplier
assumptions.
Finally, the way you choose to lead not only matters for the type of
organizations we build and for the people you lead, it can matter for you as well.
It will shape how you think about yourself, and it will define the legacy you
leave. How do you want to be remembered as a leader? Someone with a big
personality? Or someone around whom other people grew? To be a Multiplier,
you don’t need to shrink. To grow people around you, you need to play in a way
that invites others to play big. I think you’ll find that as you bring out the best in
others, you also bring out the best in yourself.
We began this inquiry with an intriguing observation about two political
leaders paraphrased by Bono, musician and global activist. He said, “It has been
said that after meeting with the great British Prime Minister William Ewart
Gladstone, you left feeling he was the smartest person in the world, but after
meeting with his rival Benjamin Disraeli, you left thinking you were the smartest
person.” The observation captures the essence and the power of a Multiplier.
Perhaps you stand with one foot on the building and the other on the wire,
deciding whether to shift your weight and take that first step. The choice matters.
Which will you be: a genius? Or a genius maker?

Chapter Nine Summary

Becoming a Multiplier
Starting the Journey 1. Resonance
2. Realization of the Accidental Diminisher 3. Resolve to be a Multiplier The
Accelerators 1. Start with the assumptions 2. Work the extremes
(neutralize a weakness; top off a strength) 3. Run an experiment
4. Ask a colleague
5. Brace yourself for setbacks Elements of a Culture • Common language:
Words and phrases that hold a common meaning within a community
based on opinions, principles, and values • Learned behaviors: A set of
learned responses to stimuli • Shared beliefs: The acceptance of something
as true • Heroes and legends: People who are admired or idealized for
their qualities, behavior, and/or achievements and the stories told about
heroic actions • Rituals and norms: Consistent behavior regularly followed
by an individual or a group Building a Multiplier Culture
Cultural Element
Common Language
Learned Behavior

Shared Beliefs
Heroes and Legends

Multiplier Practice
1. Hold a book talk
2. Discuss Accidental Diminishers
3. Introduce Multiplier mindsets 4.
Teach Multiplier skills
5. Fuse Multipliers with daily
decisions
6. Codify a leadership ethos
7. Spotlight Multiplier moments 8.
Measure managers

Rituals and Norms

9. Pilot a Multiplier practice 10.
Integrate practices with business
metrics

Acknowledgments

It should be obvious by now that this book is the work of many people, not just
one or two. I am indebted to so many and would like to thank everyone who has
offered insights and put their thumbprint on this work.
The first group is perhaps the least obvious and the most essential: the
nominators—the original people we interviewed, who told us of their
experiences working with the Multipliers and Diminishers throughout their
careers, and the dozens of people who shared their experiences and strategies for
dealing with diminishing bosses. The witness protection program requires that I
don’t list their names, but they know who they are. This book exists because
they have shared their experiences and insights. Of course, there are the
Multipliers who allowed us to study them and who have shared their stories, and
appendix C, “The Multipliers,” lists these. These leaders, and the other rock stars
whose stories I couldn’t fit into the book, were a constant inspiration. It is my
hope that their way of leadership inspires countless more leaders like them.
Next, the book was made stronger by a team of reviewers who read early
versions of the book and helped polish the ideas. Your comments both kept me
on track and kept me going. For the first edition, a big shout-out goes to: Evette
Allen, Shannon Colquhoun, Sally Crawford, Margie Duffy, Peter Fortenbaugh,
Holly Goodliffe, Sebastian Gunningham, Ranu Gupta, John Hall, Kirsten
Hansen, Jade Koyle, Matt Macauley, Stu Maclennan, Justin McKeown, Sue
Nelson, Todd Paletta, Ben Putterman, Gordon Rudow, Stefan Schaffer, Lisa
Shiveley, Stan Slap, Hilary Somorjai, John Somorjai, Fronda Stringer Wiseman,
Ilana Tandowsky, Guryan Tighe, Mike Thornberry, Jake White, Alan Wilkins,
Beth Wilkins, John Wiseman, Britton Worthen, and Bruce and Pam Worthen.

For the second edition, my thanks go to: Ellen Gorbunoff, Deborah Keep, Dustin
Lewis, Rob Maynes, Eunice Nichols, Ryan Nichols, Ben Putterman, and
Andrew Wilhelms.
There were several people who went so far and above the role of reviewer that
I need to broadcast a special thank-you to them. These folks offered new ideas,
interesting stories, voluntary rewrites, plus good old-fashioned moral support. If
this were a crime scene investigation, the following people would have more
than thumbprints on the work—their DNA would be all over it: Jesse Anderson,
Heidi Brandow, Amy Hayes Stellhorn, Mike Lambert, Matt Lobaugh, Greg Pal,
Gadi Shamia, and Kristine Westerlind. For the second edition, the following
individuals are master practitioners of Multipliers and offered insights,
examples, reviews, and more: Heidi Brandow, Rick de Rijk, Rob DeLange,
Jennifer Dryer, Elise Foster, Alyssa Gallagher, Jon Haverley, Hazel Jackson,
Megan Lambert, and Jeffrey Ong. And I owe a particular debt to my mother and
on-demand editor, Lois Allen. For both the first and the second edition, she
pretended this was just another high school term paper and reviewed every word
and fixed countless errors so others could review the ideas without being
distracted. Mom, you continue to make me better.
The following people offered critical data analysis for our numerous surveys:
Jared Wilson and Jim Mortensen of BYU; Crystal Hughes, Derek Murphy, and
Josh Sheets at the Booth Company; and Chad Foster, a brilliant engineer who so
readily and generously shares his native genius with us. Credit for the graphics
work goes to the brilliant team at Big Monocle and to Anthony Gambol.
I was fortunate to land a highly experienced and collaborative publishing team
at HarperCollins. While many authors feel beat up, I felt built up by the team.
This was made possible by my insightful editor, Hollis Heimbouch. Hollis, thank
you for “getting it” instantly, for guiding me, and for so deeply embracing what
it means to be a Multiplier in your own work. And thanks to Matthew Inman and
Stephanie Hitchcock and the team at HarperCollins for your diligent labors on
behalf of this book. To Shannon Marven, my agent at Dupree-Miller, thanks for
signing up with us, for your tenacity, and for making this all possible.
There are a few people whose role has been much broader than just this book
that I must acknowledge. I have been fortunate to have many great mentors who
have let me borrow their minds and see the world through their most brilliant

lenses. Here are a few who have shaped my views and who have influenced this
book profoundly. The late Dr. C. K. Prahalad, a great management thinker,
taught me the importance of reaching deep into an organization for intelligence
and how to build collective intent. C. K. encouraged these ideas, helped me
unearth the core assumptions, and guided the book in many ways. I have always
been proud just to be C. K.’s student, and now I am proud to be among those
who continue his work and honor his legacy. Dr. J. Bonnor Ritchie, professor
and peace broker, early on shared with me (and each of his students) his
insatiable intellectual curiosity and inspired us to truly embrace ambiguity. Ray
Lane, an extraordinary business leader, taught me how to lead, and was a
Multiplier to me and so many others. Kerry Patterson, writer and great teacher,
raised my sights and encouraged me to write this book not just for corporate
managers but for leaders all across the world. Kerry, thank you for coaching and
pushing me harder, even when it involved a good beating.
My sincere appreciation goes to my early collaborator and thought partner
Greg McKeown. This book is better thanks to his fanatical need for clarity, high
aspirations, and his relentless pursuit of truth in all he does. Thank you for being
instrumental in this journey. This second edition would not be possible without
the brilliant team at The Wiseman Group: Karina Wilhelms has served as project
manager, editor, and my thought partner through every step in this process. Her
ability to think deeply and move quickly while keeping her cool inspires me
every day. The team was completed by Alyssa Gallagher, who conducted
research and contributed an important update of the Multiplier experiments,
Shawn Vanderhoven, who contributed critical thinking for Chapter 9 and who
lent his brilliance to the graphics work, Judy Jung, who managed the entire
interview process and who makes it possible for me to continue teaching and
learning, and Heidi Brandow who has not only contributed ideas and reviews,
but who has spend the last five years teaching practitioners around the work how
to teach managers how to be Multiplier leaders, a role she has played brilliantly
and passionately. Thank you all for challenging me and making work a pleasure.
My deepest appreciation goes to my husband, Larry, for believing in this
project from day one, for guarding my space to work like a watchdog, and for
making me feel like a genius every day of my life.
To each of the above, thank you for so generously contributing your time and

energy in bringing forward these ideas. I hope that I have done justice to what
you’ve given me.

APPENDIX A

The Research Process

Here you will find a detailed account of the research conducted to study the
differences between Diminishers and Multipliers. We outline the research
process in four phases: 1) the foundation work for the research; 2) the research
itself; 3) the development of the Multiplier model; and 4) dealing with
diminishers research.

Phase 1: The Foundation
RESEARCH TEAM. While Greg and I were the primary members of the research

team, C. K. Prahalad served as an important, informal research adviser. While
many people contributed to the research in the book, our core was as follows:
Liz Wiseman, Master of Organizational Behavior, Marriott School of
Management, Brigham Young University
Greg McKeown, Master of Business Administration, Stanford Graduate
School of Business
C. K. Prahalad, Paul and Ruth McCracken Distinguished University
Professor of Corporate Strategy at the Ross School of Business of the
University of Michigan
RESEARCH QUESTION. Through an iterative process, we refined our research

question to this one (which has two parts): “What are the vital few differences
between intelligence Diminishers and intelligence Multipliers, and what impact

do they have on organizations?”
A contrast is inherent in this question. We reasoned that it wasn’t enough to
study Multipliers. As Jim Collins has explained, if you studied exclusively gold
medalists at the Olympics, you might erroneously conclude that they won
because they all had coaches. It is only by contrasting winners with the people
who lost that you realize that everyone has a coach, so having a coach cannot be
the active ingredient in winning.1 We were looking for the active ingredients or
differentiating factors.
DEFINITION OF KEY TERMS. To be able to answer our research question, we first

defined our three key terms: Diminisher, Multiplier, and intelligence.
DIMINISHER: a person who led an organization or management team that

operated in silos, found it hard to get things done, and, despite having smart
people, seemed to not be able to do what it needed to do to reach its goals.
MULTIPLIER: a person who led an organization or management team that

was able to understand and solve hard problems rapidly, achieve its goals,
and adapt and increase its capacity over time.
INTELLIGENCE: In our literature review we found a paper that identified
more than seventy definitions of intelligence.2 One paper that was

important to us throughout the research process was signed by fifty-two
researchers in 1994. They agreed that intelligence was “the ability to
reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas,
learn quickly and learn from experience. It is not . . . narrow. . . . [I]t is a
broader and deeper capability for comprehending our surroundings
—‘catching on,’ ‘making sense’ of things, or ‘figuring out’ what to do.”3
Beyond this, we included the ability to adapt to new environments, learn
new skills, and accomplish difficult tasks.
Having first observed the Diminisher/Multiplier
phenomenon at Oracle, a software company, we opted to research the
phenomenon in other companies within the broader technology industry. These
companies included:
INDUSTRY

SELECTION.

Technology Industry

Company

Biotech

Affymetrix

Online Retailing

Amazon

Consumer Electronics

Apple

Networking and Communications

Cisco

Internet Search

Google

Microprocessors

Intel

Computer Software

Microsoft

Enterprise Software Applications

SAP

Phase 2: The Research
NOMINATORS. Instead of trying to identify Diminishers and Multipliers ourselves,

we found people who would nominate these leaders for us. We used two criteria
in the selection of our nominators. The first was that they should be successful
professionals. It was important that these individuals had positive career
experiences to draw from. We reasoned that interviewing people who had an “ax
to grind” could skew the data. The second criterion was that these nominators
have approximately ten years’ management experience themselves. We wanted
practical insight from people who had grappled with challenges of leading
others. It is worth noting that nominators at many of the above companies
pointed us to both Multipliers and Diminishers they had worked with at entirely
different companies and often industries.
We asked the nominators to rate the
Multipliers and Diminishers they had identified on a five-point scale against
forty-eight leadership practices. We designed the list to be comprehensive,
drawing upon standard competency models, popular leadership frameworks, and
RESEARCHER-ADMINISTERED SURVEY.

practices we hypothesized would differentiate Diminishers from Multipliers.
The survey included skills (e.g., “Focuses on the customer”; “Demonstrates
intellectual curiosity”; “Develops the talent of the team”; and “Business
acumen”) and mindsets (e.g., “Sees their role as a primary thought leader” and
“Sees intelligence as continually developing”). We collected the results of this
survey and analyzed the data in several ways. We looked for the largest deltas
between Multipliers and Diminishers, the top skills and mindsets of Multipliers,
and the skills most correlated with the top mindsets of Multipliers and
Diminishers.

THE RESEARCH PROCESS

STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS. In the original interviews with the nominators, we

followed a structured format. We used the same questions in the same order to
minimize context effects, or at least hold them constant, so we could ensure
reliable aggregation and comparison of the answers we received across different
interviews and time frames.
All the interviews were conducted between October 2007 and October 2009,

with the first round taking place in 2007. The interviews averaged between sixty
and ninety minutes and were conducted in-person or by telephone. We kept
written transcripts of all the conversations so we would have a permanent record
of quotations and examples. While we followed a structured format, we allowed
ourselves some latitude in determining how much time to devote to each
question. Our typical format for an interview kept to the following narrative
structure:
1. Identification of two leaders: one who stifled intelligence and the other

who amplified it
2. Identification of an experience or story working with each leader
3. Context for working with Diminisher: experience, setting
4. Impact on nominator: percentage of nominator’s capability used
5. Impact on group: role played in group process, perception in broader
organization
6. Leader’s actions: what was done or not done to impact others
7. Result of actions: outcomes, deliverables accomplished
8. Repeat questions 3 through 7 for the nominated Multiplier
IN-DEPTH INTERVIEWS. We conducted a second round of interviews to gather

more information about the strongest Multipliers. This included: a) interviews
with the Multipliers themselves; b) second interviews with the nominators to
gather greater detail and understanding; and c) an in-depth 360 process
interviewing both former and current members of the Multiplier’s management
team.
INDUSTRY EXPANSION. As we extended our research to eventually include 144

different leaders, we found more examples within our original target companies,
added more companies within the technology and biotech industries, and went
beyond these industries entirely to include others in the for-profit sector as well
as nonprofits and government agencies. Our research journey took us across four
continents and introduced us to a rich and diverse set of leaders (see appendix C,
“The Multipliers”). The following is a list of organizations where we studied
Multipliers. In order to provide confidentiality, we are not publishing the list of

companies where we studied Diminishers.
Industry

Example Companies

Biotech

Hexal, Affymetrix

Green Tech

Bloom Energy, Better Place

Education

Stanford University, VitalSmarts

Entertainment

DreamWorks Studios

Government

White House, Israeli Army

Manufacturing

GM Daewoo, Flextronics

Nonprofit

Boys and Girls Club of the Peninsula,
Green Belt Movement, Bennion
Center, Unitus

Private Equity and Venture Capitalists Advent International, Kleiner Perkins
Caufield & Byers
Professional Services

Bain & Company, McKinsey &
Company

Retailing

Gap, Lands End, Gymboree

Sports

Highland High School Rugby, North
Carolina State University women’s
basketball program

Technology Industry

Amazon, Apple, Cisco, Infosys
Technologies, Hewlett-Packard, Intel,
Intuit, Microsoft, SAP, Salesforce

Workers’ Union

Self-Employed Women’s Association

Phase 3: The Model
We gathered approximately four hundred pages of interview transcripts, read

them multiple times, and collated them for cross-interview analysis. We then
took this theme analysis and calibrated it against the quantitative data we had
gathered from the leadership survey. Finally, we adhered to a disciplined and
rigorous debate methodology for crafting each of the disciplines that eventually
became chapters for the book.
Both Greg and I claim to have been severely beaten up by each other during
this debate process. We hope the research is stronger for it.

Phase 4: Dealing with Diminishers
While the original research for this book was conducted in 2007 through 2009,
the research for chapter 8, “Dealing with Diminishers,” was conducted in 2016.
The goal of the research was to better understand the depth and breadth of
impact caused by Diminishers and to ascertain strategies for minimizing the
damaging, reductive effect of these Diminishers. The research was conducted by
Liz Wiseman, Karina Wilhelms, Alyssa Gallagher, and Jared Wilson, all of The
Wiseman Group. The research comprised the following:
I conducted twenty-four interviews with successful
professionals to understand how to survive, and potentially thrive, under
diminishing bosses and colleagues. Interviewees were selected based on two
criteria: 1) their overall career success and skill in navigating complex
organizational situations; and 2) their understanding of the concept of
Multipliers and Diminishers. In each interview, interviewees identified situations
in which they worked for a Diminisher and then answered a series of questions
to explore their coping strategies and to assess the effectiveness of these
strategies.
IN-DEPTH INTERVIEWS.

BROAD SURVEY. The Wiseman Group conducted a survey of approximately two

hundred participants with the objective of uncovering the best strategies for
dealing with Diminishers, to understand why some people seem to be more
easily diminished than others, and to understand if individuals who have been
chronically diminished are more or less likely to become Diminishers to others.
The survey provided many useful insights on both effective and ineffective

strategies for dealing with Diminishers, as well as some of the factors that cause
some people to experience a greater diminishing effect than others. The survey
did not yield conclusive data on whether or not those who have been chronically
diminished are more likely to lead like Diminishers themselves. More data is
needed to adequately address this issue.
TESTING OF STRATEGIES. After formulating the thirteen strategies outlined in

chapter 8, we invited several people (who had participated in the abovementioned survey) to test out the strategies with their Diminisher bosses for a
fourteen-day period. The goal of the fourteen-day challenge was to determine if
the strategy could make a marked difference in the situation in just 2 weeks. We
then collected information about the result of their experiment and held a
conference call to review results. Five people completed the experiments and all
five reported a marked (if not remarkable) change in the relationship with their
diminishing colleague or with their overall happiness and outlook. My favorite
was the person who chose to “turn down the volume” and, instead of obsessing
about work, channeled his energy into experimenting with new recipes and
cooking delicious meals for his wife and children each night. Not only was he
happier at work and in general, but his wife was pretty thrilled, too.
LITERATURE REVIEW. We scanned the existing “victim” literature for insights on

positive coping strategies. In general, we found little crossover into the
workplace setting and therefore focused on the interview and survey data to
formulate the best coping strategies.

APPENDIX B

Frequently Asked Questions

ARE PEOPLE EITHER DIMINISHERS OR MULTIPLIERS OR ARE THERE PEOPLE IN THE
MIDDLE?

We see the Diminisher–Multiplier model as a continuum with a few people at
the extremes and most of us somewhere in between. As people have been
introduced to this material, they almost always see some of the Diminisher and
some of the Multiplier within themselves. One leader we’ve worked with is
illustrative. He was a smart and aware individual who didn’t fit the archetype of
a Diminisher, and yet when he read the material he could see how he sometimes
behaved in a diminishing manner. When we study this leadership phenomenon
as a contrast, we see the model as a continuum or spectrum, with the majority of
us somewhere in the middle.
COULD I BE A DIMINISHER TO SOME PEOPLE AND A MULTIPLIER TO OTHERS?

Yes, the secret to understanding this dynamic is to better understand the
assumptions that you hold about the two different people. In fact, you might
even be behaving in similar ways around both, but your assumptions might
cause your behavior to be construed in different ways.
COULD I BE A MOST-OF-THE-TIME MULTIPLIER AND AN OCCASIONAL DIMINISHER?

Certain situations can bring out the worst in us. Most leaders, even the best ones,
tend to have some Diminisher tendencies that are awakened in certain situations,
particularly when: a) there’s a crisis (see the question below); b) when the stakes
are high; c) when time is short; and d) when they are generally stressed. What’s
important is having awareness of the situations that provoke our diminishing
tendencies and then finding workarounds.

Rob Delange, Multiplier master practitioner, described it this way: “When you
lead like a Multiplier by rule, you can be a Diminisher by exception”—meaning,
if you have built a strong foundation of trust with your team, they are likely to
forgive your diminishing moment. This is especially true if you call attention to
your diminishing moments, explain your reasoning, and then return to your more
normal Multiplier style. The real key is to string together as many Multiplier
moments as you can.
ARE THERE TIMES (PARTICULARLY
LEADERSHIP IS CALLED FOR?

DURING

A

CRISIS)

WHEN

DIMINISHER

Yes, there are situations where there is a legitimate crisis and a leader needs to
jump in and manage by fiat. But these situations don’t need to be diminishing.
Wise leaders can keep these situations from having a diminishing effect by doing
the following:
1. TREAT THEM LIKE TRUE EXCEPTIONS. When a manager leads like a Multiplier

by rule, they can get away with operating like a Diminisher by exception.
Here’s an illustration. While I was teaching a leadership seminar at a
hospital for the Yale Medical School, several physician-leaders who
oversee residency programs voiced an intriguing frustration. While they
wanted to give the resident physicians space and freedom to do their best
work, the life-and-death nature of their work forced them to micromanage
and bark orders. They insisted that there was no room for learning or being
a Multiplier leader when someone is flatlining on the operating table. I
agreed and asked, “What percentage of your time is spent in these
situations?” They suggested it was probably 3 to 5 percent of their time. I
acknowledged their dilemma, but suggested that the other 95 percent of
their time might warrant a different leadership approach. Several months
later, I had a similar conversation at the US Navy Postgraduate School with
a group of officers who commanded military ships. They estimated that, at
most, 2 to 3 percent of their time dealt with life-or-death moments. Yes,
these critical situations aren’t Multiplier moments. But the other 95 to 97
percent of the time just might be.
2. LET PEOPLE KNOW WHAT YOU ARE DOING. Instead of randomly
micromanaging or dictating, let people know you are in one of those 3 to 5

percent moments and need to take over. Better yet, ask for their permission.
When you are done, return control to your team. Or you can let your team
know the parts of the business that you need to manage very closely
yourself (and explain why). Tell them that you want them to step up and be
big in the other parts of the business.
In allowing for these exceptional situations, I would still emphasize that most
situations, even extreme ones, can be viewed through either a Diminisher or
Multiplier lens. Situations people often think call for a Diminisher approach can
be exactly the time to call upon the full intellectual horsepower of the people
around you. When the stakes are high, when the challenges are complex and
nonlinear—those may be just the times when the Multiplier approach is most
relevant.
THIS IS GREAT FOR TOP TALENT, BUT WHAT ABOUT MY BOTTOM PERFORMERS?

While everyone has something to contribute, not everyone is contributing at the
same level. Multipliers see talent less like an industrial park (a sprawling
collection of near identical three-story buildings) and more like a city skyline,
where buildings of varying heights and colors create a jagged, irregular profile.
To Multipliers, people are such skylines. They appreciate the rich diversity of
intelligence and talent around them. They acknowledge that not everyone is at
the same level of capability, but they believe that everyone’s capability can
increase. Instead of trying to bring everyone to the same level, they uplevel each
person, building a floor or two of capacity at a time.
Here are some suggestions for leading people who appear to be low
performers:
1. Start with the assumption that the person is smart and capable of being a top
performer. Sometimes people need someone to expect and demand more
from them.
2. Instead of asking, “Is this person smart?” ask, “In what way is this person
smart?” You may not be able to turn them into your version of a top
performer, but you will find out what they are brilliant at, and then can look
for ways to put it to work on your top challenges.
3. Remember that low performers are often former (or potential) superstars

who have been historically diminished by their leaders (often accidentally
or through neglect). Even if you do all the “right” things to be a Multiplier,
he or she may not respond immediately because either they aren’t
accustomed to being given challenging work or they have learned not to
trust their managers. Start small and earn their trust.
Just because you are leading like a Multiplier doesn’t mean you won’t
encounter performance problems. If you have chronic low performers, take care
of the situation and help them move to an environment or team where they can
contribute more.
HOW DO THESE DYNAMICS CHANGE ACROSS CULTURES?

The research was done in thirty-five companies on four continents. We find the
Multiplier way of leading (and the positive impact it has) to be pervasive across
cultures. However, we find that in cultures with high levels of hierarchy, the
diminishing impact tends to be greater (with the average Diminisher receiving
between 30 and 40 percent of people’s intelligence instead of the global average
of 48 percent). We also found that in these more hierarchical cultures, leaders
need to make extra efforts and greater precautions to establish the levels of
intellectual, emotional, and organizational safety people need to fully contribute
their best thinking.
Mostly, remember that Multipliers don’t all lead in the same way. While their
individual leadership practices vary, what they share is a common mindset and
assumption: a belief that the people they lead are smart and will figure it out.
Also, they are aware of the impact that their own intelligence and presence has
on their team and actively work to create room for others to contribute. These
actions may follow different forms to be culturally appropriate.
THERE ARE SOME LEADERS YOU MENTION WHOM YOU HAVE IDENTIFIED AS
MULTIPLIERS BUT WHO ARE SOMETIMES KNOWN TO DIMINISH THE PEOPLE THEY
WORK WITH. HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THE CONTRADICTION?

Yes, this was interesting to us, too. Even in our original data pool, we
occasionally found that some leaders were named as both a Diminisher and a
Multiplier by different people. On closer inspection, we found this a paradox
rather than a contradiction. As just one illustration, we found that some leaders
had figured out how to involve their direct reports but hadn’t learned to scale

their leadership up and out to the broader organization. The farther removed
people were from the leader, the more diminished they felt. It was a classic case
of Accidental Diminishing. It appears that being a Multiplier to everyone takes
deliberate intention and effort. A leader needs to think consciously of the people
at the periphery of the organization in order to be a Multiplier to them.
WHAT ABOUT LEADERS LIKE STEVE JOBS (OR OTHER ICONIC, SUCCESSFUL LEADERS
WHO APPEAR TO HAVE STRONG DIMINISHING TENDENCIES)?

Many founders and visionary leaders have a mixed bag of Diminisher and
Multiplier traits. For many of these high-profile leaders, the news media focus
on their Diminisher tendencies (because this story tends to be more interesting to
readers). As you consider the Diminisher qualities of company founders and
other iconic leaders, consider the following: 1) strong leaders (especially
founders) often have Diminisher characteristics, but they often have a couple of
even stronger Multiplier characteristics that compensate for their diminishing
tendencies; 2) top leaders (e.g., CEOs) with Diminisher characteristics often
compensate by bringing in other leaders (e.g., a president or COO) who have
strong multiplier characteristics; 3) leaders with strong diminishing tendencies
might be well suited to lead organizations in stable environments but struggle in
complex, changing environments; and 4) company founders often start
companies on the strength of their own ideas. Companies can grow to a certain
size based on the strength of the founder’s intelligence, but for a company to
grow, become successful, and endure, at some point these leaders need to
develop into Multipliers or surround themselves with other leaders who have the
Multiplier effect.
WHEN YOU SAY MULTIPLIERS GET 2× MORE FROM THEIR PEOPLE, THAT SEEMS LIKE
A REALLY BIG CLAIM. IS IT REALLY THAT MUCH?

Yes, the number seemed high to us at first, but for several reasons we believe the
ratio is correct.
First, we asked the nominators to contrast Multipliers to Diminishers, rather
than contrast Multipliers to an average manager. The 2× effect assumes a bestto-worst comparison. Second, we repeated this question to people across
industry, function, and management level and have confirmation that this ratio
holds true as an average. Third, the surprisingly high difference may be the
result of discretionary effort. As managers we can observe whether someone is

working at, above, or below their usual productivity level. What is harder to
know is how much a person is holding back. The way people answer this
question suggests that people believe they hold back a considerable amount
around certain managers.
We have concluded that while it is an amazing difference, Multipliers really
do get, on average, 2× more than their Diminisher counterparts.
DO YOU FIND SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN HOW MEN AND WOMEN LEAD?

While there may be some actual differences in how men and women lead, there
seems to be far more variation within a given gender than between the genders.
We don’t have any data that suggests that one gender is more likely to diminish,
in fact both Diminisher and Multiplier levels are remarkably consistent.
However, we do find that there may be some variance in how men and women
accidentally diminish, perhaps driven by historically narrow views of male and
female leadership styles. For example, many women who began their careers in
earlier generations have contorted themselves to fit into a male-defined world,
choosing between ill-fitting models of leadership. Some adopted the “man-up”
model and acted tougher than nails, showed no fear, and attempted to out-men
the men. Others fell into the “mama bear” archetype in which they nurtured,
protected, and rescued people and projects in danger. Both caricatures can have
massively diminishing effects. Leaders bring out the best in others when they are
authentic—being themselves rather than acting out a role, which happens when
the full range of leadership styles and strengths are available to women and men.
ARE MULTIPLIERS MORE SUCCESSFUL THAN DIMINISHERS?

Yes, they are more successful at getting more out of people. This was amazingly
consistent throughout the research. Even high-powered executives, icons in their
own right, who hammered their people simply could not get as much out of
people as their Multiplier counterparts. We didn’t study the career trajectories of
Diminishers and Multipliers themselves, but we did study the success of the
people they worked around. We found that people and their careers thrived and
became more successful around Multipliers than around Diminishers.
CAN EVERYONE BECOME A MULTIPLIER OR ARE THERE SOME PEOPLE WHO ARE
TOO MUCH OF A DIMINISHER TO CHANGE?

Anyone who can see their Diminisher behavior can change. Anyone can be a

Multiplier if they’re willing to shift their center of weight and look beyond
themselves. There may be a few people who are so staunchly invested in their
Diminisher approach to leadership that they won’t be able to change, but we
think of them as outliers.
In our work teaching and coaching, we have seen people make significant
changes. For example, one leader we worked with had some strong Diminisher
tendencies. He worked hard to adopt a more Multiplier approach to his
leadership. People noticed the difference. Then, after he took a larger role at
another company, he was able to start with a clean slate and a new approach. He
is now seen as a Multiplier and has even introduced these ideas to the people in
his organization.
We aren’t under the delusion that every Diminisher will change, but we
believe that the vast majority can make the shift. It begins with awareness and
intent.
SHOULD COMPANIES FIRE THEIR DIMINISHERS?

Smart companies don’t have to fire every Diminisher, but they should remove
them from key leadership roles. If someone insists on being a Diminisher, they
may need to be isolated or contained where they can’t do great damage. If they
are removed from key leadership roles, other people’s capability gets released
and the Diminishers are less likely to inspire managers underneath them to adopt
Diminisher leadership practices.
This is easier said than done. Diminishers are, by definition, smart and
intimidating. The course of least resistance is to keep them in their leadership
roles. But once you start to calculate the high cost of Diminishers in your
organization, you will be better prepared to take action. For example, if you had
a machine that was a bottleneck, causing the rest of your production line to
operate at 50 percent capacity, you would see immediately how expensive that
machine was to your operation. If you replaced that one machine, you could
double the capacity and throughput of your entire production line! That is what
is at stake with every Diminisher you have in a key leadership role. Even if they
are operating at full capacity, they operate as a bottleneck to everyone else
around them. So, while the answer may not be to fire every Diminisher, we
suggest that it’s just too expensive to leave them in key leadership roles.
SHOULD I EVEN TRY TO HAND THIS BOOK TO A RAGING DIMINISHER?

Yes, drop it and run! Or perhaps you can send it from one of your other
Diminisher colleagues!
More seriously, if you share the book from a Diminisher’s perspective, by
judging and dictating, you are likely to make them close down and continue the
Diminishing cycle. However, if you approach it as a Multiplier, and make it safe
for someone to learn new ideas, you might find surprising levels of receptiveness
and impact. Here are two Multiplier strategies:
1. FOCUS ON YOUR OWN EXPERIENCE. You might begin by acknowledging how

each of us can be an Accidental Diminisher at times, and say something
like, “This book has shown me how I sometimes diminish people without
meaning to.” Or you can focus on the impact it has had for you and
introduce it with, “I’ve been working on being more of a Multiplier and I’m
seeing how it is increasing performance on my team. I thought you might
be interested, too.”
2. FOCUS ON THE UPSIDE TO THE ORGANIZATION. Most managers would be
interested in doubling the capacity of their organization. You could
introduce the ideas with, “I think we have more intelligence in our
organization than we’ve been able to tap into. I think there are some things
that we could do as a leadership team to raise the IQ level of our
organization.”
Additionally, you could introduce the ideas indirectly by holding a brown-bag
lunch discussion or by sharing a single idea or Multiplier practice. We believe
that there is a way to share this material with almost anyone, but you are more
likely to succeed if you approach it like a Multiplier. You can’t diminish people
into being Multipliers!
DO I NEED TO HAVE ALL FIVE OF THE MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINES TO BE A MULTIPLIER
LEADER?

No, a leader doesn’t need to be brilliant at all five of the disciplines to be a
Multiplier and to get the Multiplier effect across their team. In fact, very few of
the leaders that I studied had strength in all five—most had three or four strong
disciplines. You can use the Multipliers 360 assessment to determine your
relative highs and lows. A good development strategy is to identify your

strongest discipline and get really great at it. Then make sure you don’t fall into
Diminisher territory in any one discipline. After this, do what you can to build
strength in one or two more of the Multiplier disciplines.
IF I COULD DO ONE THING TO GET ON THE PATH OF MULTIPLIER, WHAT SHOULD IT
BE?

The one thing we would suggest you do is to ask really insightful and interesting
questions that make people think. This is a practical step and it applies across all
of the disciplines. For example, whether you are trying to become a Liberator, a
Challenger, or a Debate Maker, asking insightful and interesting questions will
get you started down the correct path. So, if you are looking to build one skill,
start with questions.
If you want to work on one assumption, we would suggest trying People are
smart and will figure it out. One way to do this is ask, “How is this person
smart?” That one question can interrupt any tendencies to judge people in a
binary fashion and can work like a fast pass into the Technicolor world where
Multipliers live.

APPENDIX C

The Multipliers

The following is a list of the “Hall of Fame” Multipliers featured in this book.
Several appear in multiple chapters, but they are listed only once below, in the
chapter where they are featured most prominently.

APPENDIX D

Multipliers Discussion Guide

This guide contains a set of questions for discussing Multiplier ideas as a team.
As you plan your discussions, you might look for ways to create a Multiplier
experience while discussing Multiplier ideas.

Industry

Example Companies

The Multiplier
Effect

Should a successful Diminisher try to become a
Multiplier? Why?
Can you be a Multiplier if you work for a Diminisher?
Are there certain people who bring out the Diminisher in
you? Why?

The Talent How long does it take to develop a reputation as “the boss to
Magnet
work for”?
When should you hire new people, as opposed to developing the
talent of the people you already have?

The
A liberating climate gives a lot of space and expects a lot at the
Liberator same time. How do you know when you have gone too far with
either element?
Does being a Liberator mean you have to be both “loathed and
loved,” the way Mr. Kelly is at his school? (See page 75.)

The
How can you share your own knowledge and opinions without
Challenger diminishing the people you lead?
What one thing could Richard Palmer do to shift from leading like
a Diminisher to leading like a Multiplier? (See page 99.)

The
Imagine you have only thirty minutes to make a high-stakes decision.
Debate Should you still approach the decision as a Debate Maker? If no, why?
Maker If yes, how?
Being a Debate Maker means driving sound decisions through a
rigorous process. How do you know when there has been enough
debate and it is time to make a decision?

The
Investor

What is the difference between being detail oriented and
micromanaging?
How can you give people full ownership without becoming
disengaged yourself?

Becoming If you had to define one idea that is common across all five
a
disciplines, what would it be?
Multiplier
What discipline could you make the most progress on in the least
amount of time?
Is it feasible to focus on a single area of development for a year?
Where is your weight on the metaphorical wire? (See page 118.)
Of the various organizations you are part of (business, community,
family), where could you implement the Multiplier approach with
the greatest impact? Why?
If you’d like to lead a more structured event, you can download a full
Multipliers Facilitator Guide at www.multipliersbooks.com. Use it to bring
Multiplier leadership into the conversation at your workplace!

APPENDIX E

Multiplier Experiments

NAME THE GENIUS
Identify the native genius of each
person on your team.
Find the negative genius of individuals on your team and find novel ways to
utilize their genius more fully. Do this individually or as a team so that everyone
understands the native genius of each person on the team.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Talent Magnet
Remedy for Idea Guy, Always On, and Strategist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
Everyone is brilliant at something.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
For Individuals:
1. Identify it: Find the things that this person does natively. Ask: • What do
they do better than anything else they do?
• What do they do better than the people around them?
• What do they do easily (without effort or even awareness)?
• What do they do freely (without being asked or being paid)?
2. Label it: Give their native genius a short name (e.g., “synthesizing
complex ideas” or “building bridges” or “identifying root causes”). Test
your hypothesis with the person’s colleagues and with the person. Refine it

until it captures their genius.
3. Put it to use: Identify roles or tasks that will utilize and extend this
person’s genius. Go beyond formal jobs and identify ad hoc roles. Have a
conversation with the individual and allow them to identify the best ways
to utilize their genius.
Across an entire team:
1. Define the concept of native genius.
2. Ask each person to identify the native genius of each colleague.
3. Bring the group together.
4. Focus on one individual at a time.
• Have each team member describe that person’s native genius
• Ask the person to offer their own perspective
• Discuss ways to best utilize this person’s genius
Lab Results
Stephanie Post, Director of Sales and Customer Training for Sysmex
America, learned about “native genius” during a Multipliers workshop and
was determined to find out what genius was lurking inside her new team.
She recognized this as an opportunity to “get them on projects and tap into
what makes them excited about coming to work.” As a team they discovered
the genius of each team member, and one in particular—“Kimmy, the
resource genius”—stood out. She’s that person that’s got your back when
you can’t recall the name of the restaurant or a beloved spot of one of your
high-profile clients . . . that person that remembers your boss’s birthday
when you can’t. She’s got them googled and texted to you within minutes.
But more than that, she can’t help herself from exploring and researching
things, anything really. When it comes to her role, she’s curious, exploring
processes, procedures and more, without hesitation. After Stephanie named
Kimmy’s native genius, she then gave her the space to “in-source” a major
component of their work, which resulted in financial savings and ultimately
laid the groundwork for the exciting opportunity to market a new line of

business.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

SUPERSIZE IT
Give someone a job that
is a size too big.
Acknowledge that everyone on your team is at different capability levels. But
everyone is capable of growth. Carve out roles and responsibilities the way you
shop for shoes for preschoolers . . . one size too big. And then let the person
grow into their new responsibilities.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Talent Magnet, Challenger, Investor Remedy for Pacesetter and Protector
Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
Everyone can grow.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
1. Map out the capability levels of your team, acknowledging that they will
probably look more like a jagged skyline than a high-jump bar.
2. Pick one or two people who are ready for a stretch.
3. Map out a set of responsibilities beyond their current capabilities that will
cause them to really stretch. Let them know you are giving them “a job”
that might feel a bit too big. Affirm your belief in their ability to learn and
grow into the role.
4. Maintain a vacuum that must be filled . . . by them, not you.
5. Do the same across all the individuals on your team.

Lab Results
Jessica Parisi, CEO at BTS, a business and leadership strategy company, was
twelve months into launching a new approach to leadership development for
their clients and realized they would need a leader at the mid level and
another at the front line in order to scale the new approach. During a
regularly scheduled team meeting, Megan, a relatively new BTS employee,
expressed both a passion and an interest in developing the frontline
leadership program. Jessica recognized that Megan was capable and had
recently managed two front line leadership programs, so she took the
opportunity to Supersize her role. Jess didn’t care that Megan was only
twenty-four years old; she saw an opportunity to partner Megan‘s passion
with her growing expertise. Initially surprised, Megan became the go-to
person globally for frontline leadership offerings. Having Megan in this role
not only improved global teamwork, it also helped the more senior
consultant accelerate their own adoption of the model and served as an
example of what BTS expects from all partners.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

PLAY FEWER CHIPS
Play fewer chips in a meeting.
Before a meeting, give yourself a budget of “poker chips,” with each chip
representing a comment or contribution to the meeting. Use your chips wisely,
and leave the rest of the space for others to contribute.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Liberator
Remedy for Always On and Strategist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
By being small, others get a chance to be big.
By being big less often, your own ideas will be more impactful.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
Here are some ways you might Go Big and play your chips, and when you might
want to Go Small:
Go Big

Go Small

Open the meeting by framing the issue When you have the urge to say, “yes, I
(what is the issue/decision, why is it
think that too”
important, how will it be
discussed/decided)
Ask a big question

When you want to reframe what you
heard into your own idea

Offer an idea of your own (that isn’t
already surfacing)

When you want to say, “I did some
research, and the data validates that.”

Redirect the conversation or get it
back on track
Summarize

Lab Results
Mahmoud Mansoura, a global support delivery manager for HP Enterprise in
Morocco, was inspired to rethink his contributions as a leader. After
attending a Multipliers Workshop, Mahmoud could see that he was taking up
too much space with his team—he realized he was always talking. He met
with his team weekly and followed a practice of opening the meeting by
sharing announcements and news, and giving directions to team members.
This was a practice he had done for years, but now he started to pay attention
to the impact on the team and wondered if others might contribute more if he
talked less. Mahmoud decided to limit his contributions using the poker
chips. He stopped opening the meetings with his remarks, and instead began
every meeting with a roundtable where all team members were invited to
share. Mahmoud was able to listen to the team share successes and
challenges and watch them problem-solve. He now only intervenes when the
team can use some redirection or he feels that a well-timed comment from
him could have a positive impact on the team. Mahmoud has successfully
shifted the amount of space he consumes in meeting through intentional
practice and "poker chips."

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this

Where and how might you use this

experiment?

experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

TALK
UP
MISTAKES

YOUR

Invite experimentation and
learning by sharing your
own mistakes.
Let people know the mistakes you have made and what you have learned from
them. Make public how you have incorporated this learning into your decisions
and current leadership practices.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Liberator
Remedy for Pace Setter, Optimist and Perfectionist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
Mistakes are part of the natural learning and achievement process.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
1. Get personal. Reflect on your own leadership journey by charting the highs
and lows of your career. Identify several of the big mistakes you’ve made.
The bigger the better! For each mistake, identify: • What you did
• What happened
• Where you went wrong (actions or assumptions)
• What you learned from it

Look for opportunities to share these stories. You might share one before
someone is about to tackle a challenging assignment or at the moment they
make a distressing mistake.
2. Go public. Instead of talking about your and your team’s mistakes behind
closed doors or just one-on-one, bring them out in the open where the
person making the mistake can clear the air and where everyone can learn.
Try making it part of your management ritual.
For example, you might add “screwup of the week” onto your regular team
agenda. If any member of the team, including yourself, had a blunder, this
is the time to go public, have a laugh and move on.
Lab Results
Quynh Vu, an Inpatient Pharmacy Manager, was inspired to “Talk Up Her
Mistakes” after reading Multipliers. Quynh, a relatively new manager, is
responsible for overseeing forty pharmacy technicians in an environment
where thousands of doses are accurately prepared and efficiently deliverd
each day to patients admitted to the hospital. Pharmacies utilize a doublecheck system, which significantly reduces the error rate, but it certainly
doesn’t completely eliminate them. There can be errors in how medications
are labeled, stored, dosed, or even dispensed. Quynh not only shared a minor
mistake she had made but also took it a step further by working with other
members of her department leadership in creating a “daily safety huddle”
that lasts no longer than ten minutes for the 10 to 12 people on duty. During
the huddle, team members are given the opportunity to share mistakes and
invite team troubleshooting. Quynh said, “This safety huddle is where we
invite people to openly discuss ‘near misses,’ which are mistakes that were
caught before leaving the pharmacy, so that we can all learn from them. It
also allows us to discuss opportunities for improvement.”

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid

to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

a. It’s OKAY to fail when: a) the learning is greater than the cost; b) we
have time or resources to recover; or c) when customers or students are
not harmed, etc.
b. It’s NOT OKAY to fail when: a) it violates our ethics or values; b) it
does damage to our brand/reputation in the market; c) it is career ending
for someone (including the leader), etc.
7. Record the key principles above and below the water line. Share this with
the team.
Lab Results
When the executive leadership team for apparel company, Banana Republic,
signed up for a Multipliers workshop, they were seeking ways to enable their
employees to take smart risks and innovate. They decided to create space for
mistakes by identifying the parts of the business where it was OKAY to
experiment and fail versus the parts of the business where success was
critical. Members of the executive team captured their views on sticky notes

critical. Members of the executive team captured their views on sticky notes
and then placed them on a large white board, with one side labeled “OKAY
TO FAIL” and the other labeled “NOT OKAY TO FAIL.” The team
discussed and negotiated each idea, moving sticky notes from one side of the
board to the other until consensus was reached. The group of executives then
stepped back and looked for a theme in each category. Within a minute or
two it became abundantly clear where it was NOT OKAY TO FAIL. It could
be expressed in a single word—December. The president’s observation
sounded like this: “Eleven months out of the year it is OKAY to experiment
with product, price, promotion, etc., but we can’t jeopardize December,” the
all-important holiday shopping season. Imagine how clarifying and
liberating this was when they shared this distinction with their broader
management team.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

a. It’s OKAY to fail when: a) the learning is greater than the cost; b) we
have time or resources to recover; or c) when customers or students are

not harmed, etc.
b. It’s NOT OKAY to fail when: a) it violates our ethics or values; b) it
does damage to our brand/reputation in the market; c) it is career ending
for someone (including the leader), etc.
7. Record the key principles above and below the water line. Share this with
the team.
Lab Results
When the executive leadership team for apparel company, Banana Republic,
signed up for a Multipliers workshop, they were seeking ways to enable their
employees to take smart risks and innovate. They decided to create space for
mistakes by identifying the parts of the business where it was OKAY to
experiment and fail versus the parts of the business where success was
critical. Members of the executive team captured their views on sticky notes
and then placed them on a large white board, with one side labeled “OKAY
TO FAIL” and the other labeled “NOT OKAY TO FAIL.” The team
discussed and negotiated each idea, moving sticky notes from one side of the
board to the other until consensus was reached. The group of executives then
stepped back and looked for a theme in each category. Within a minute or
two it became abundantly clear where it was NOT OKAY TO FAIL. It could
be expressed in a single word—December. The president’s observation
sounded like this: “Eleven months out of the year it is OKAY to experiment
with product, price, promotion, etc., but we can’t jeopardize December,” the
all-important holiday shopping season. Imagine how clarifying and
liberating this was when they shared this distinction with their broader
management team.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

EXTREME QUESTIONS
Kick-start your curiosity by
leading a conversation asking
only questions.
This means everything you say ends in a question mark! Or, better put: Can you
make sure that everything you say ends with a question mark?

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Challenger
Remedy for Idea Guy, Always On, Rescuer, Rapid Responder, Strategist and
Perfectionist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
They want to learn from the people around them and understand.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
Access what the other people know. Make your points known through the
questions you ask. Go all the way and only ask questions!
Think of it in terms of hours, not minutes. Challenge yourself to ask different
types of questions.
• Leading questions: Lead someone toward a specific outcome
• Guiding questions: Help another see what you can see
• Discovery questions: Create an idea or solution together

• Challenge questions: Surface and question prevailing assumptions

Lab Results
Tom Mottlau, Senior National Account Manager of Healthcare Sales for LG
Electronics, was asked to take ownership for bringing Mike, a new member
of the sales team, on board. In the past, this assignment would have taken at
least a full day of Tom‘s time and mostly consisted of LG employees sharing
their wealth of expertise and information with new employees. After
engaging in Multiplier executive coaching, Tom saw an opportunity to use
Extreme Questions. Instead of making assumptions about what Mike knew,
Tom prepared for their time together by writing a list of questions. Through
the use of questions Tom was able to learn more about Mike’s previous
experiences and gauge what aspects of the onboarding process would be of
most value to both Mike and LG. Starting with questions allowed Mike to
cover more ground in a shortened amount of time, and what would have
been a full day of meetings only required four hours of Tom’s time. Even

been a full day of meetings only required four hours of Tom’s time. Even
better, Mike shared that the LG induction was the most unique and potent
“first day” experience he has ever had.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

CREATE A STRETCH
CHALLENGE
What hard thing might your team or
organization be capable of?
Engage your team members by giving them a “mission impossible,” something
hard that will challenge them or even the entire organization. Help them see
what might be possible, extend an intriguing, vivid challenge, and, then generate
belief that it just might be possible.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Challenger
Remedy for Pacesetter, Protector, and Strategist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
People are capable of doing hard things.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
• Identify the hard thing your team member or organization might be
capable of doing.
• Create an intriguing, vivid, and believable challenge to engage their best
thinking.
• Identify a first step that is achievable to generate belief.
• Now turn your challenge into a question that will capture their

imagination.
• Ask your question; and then don’t answer it. Let your team find
solutions.
Lab Results
Jason Grodman, a government employee for the Pima County Regional
Wastewater Reclamation Department, was given a mandate to increase
productivity in his department. As the leader of ten employees focused on
inspections, Jason wrestled with the best approach to take. He gathered data
on the previous years and realized that the highest numbers of inspections
the team had ever completed in one year was 750. Armed with this
information and a desire to empower his team, Jason posed a challenge:
“What would we need to do to complete 1,000 inspections in 2016?” He
wasn’t clear on how the team would do it, but Jason engaged their best
thinking and turned the creation of the plan over to the inspectors. Not only
did the inspectors create a plan, but they continually revisited the plan with
new questions and insights. During the first seven months of 2016, the team
had already surpassed their best year ever. Not only are they on track to meet
the goal, but they will likely exceed 1,000 inspections this year. While it is
motivating for the team to crush their previous record and meet the challenge
head on, it is even more exciting for Jason to see the increased engagement
levels across his department and experience firsthand the power of creating a
stretch challenge.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

MAKE A DEBATE
Use debate to build collective
intelligence and speed to execution.
Identify an important decision. Frame the issue. Spark a debate. Reach a
decision.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Debate Maker
Remedy for Rapid Responder and Optimist Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
Bring together the people who need to be involved in the decision. When people
understand the logic, they know what to do.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
1. Frame the issue
• Define the question: A good debate question has clear options from
which to choose.
• Explain why it is a critical question and requires debate.
• Form the team: Ask people to come prepared with
information/data/evidence as support.
• Clearly communicate how the decision will be made.
2. Spark the debate
• Ask the debate question.
• Ask people to support their positions with evidence.

• Ask everyone to weigh in.
• Ask people to switch positions and argue the other side.
3. Drive a sound decision
• Re-clarify the decision-making process.
• Make the decision.
• Communicate the decision and the rationale.
Lab Results
Clay Gilbert, President of Thornton Brothers, Inc, a company that prides
themselves on being experts in innovative janitorial, package, and safety
solutions, experimented with “Make a Debate” after losing a senior member
of their leadership team to an industry competitor. If Clay had followed past
practice, he would have pulled in the two other executives that comprise the
leadership team for a closed-door discussion. Instead, after reading
Multipliers, Clay saw an opportunity to allow others in the company to share
their best thinking prior to any decisions being made. Clay planned a debate.
He set a meeting date, invited a cross section of employees, and asked them
to come prepared with their argument. When debate day came, Clay framed
the meeting with a core question centered on the company’s purpose and
core values. He remained neutral throughout the meeting, only interjecting to
help shift thinking or stir up further debate. As a group they generated
creative and solid responses, which Clay is currently working through.
Although the final outcome is unknown, Clay found the experience of
framing and sparking debate “freeing.” Regardless of the outcome, the
process required everyone to offer their best thinking, resulting in greater
confidence in the decision-making process as the team moves forward.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this

Where and how might you use this

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

GIVE 51% OF THE VOTE
Put someone else in charge
by giving that person the majority vote.
Instead of delegating work, let people know that they (not you) are in charge and
accountable. Tell them they get 51% of the vote, but 100% of the accountability.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
Liberator and Investor Remedy for Always On, Rescuer and Perfectionist
Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
People operate at their best when they are in charge and held accountable for
their work.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
1. Identify the project you are going to transfer to a team member.
2. Describe the project and answer questions to ensure understanding.
3. Give them the majority vote and give it a number to make it concrete.
For example, tell them they have 51% of the vote and you have only 49%. Or,
go wild and make it 75/25%. Anything over 50% will carry the message: You
are in charge. You get final decision.
Be sure they understand what 51% (or more) means: • You are in charge
(hence, I am not).
• You get to make the final decision (I will weigh in, but if we disagree,

you make the call).
• I expect you to be the one to move things forward (I will participate, but
will follow your lead).
You can really punctuate the point by saying (with a twinkle in your eye!):
“You’re 51%. I’m 49%. So, I’m taking this off my to-do list.”
Implication: “I’ll assume it is on yours!”
Lab Results
Stacey and Jim were leading an early-morning theology class for high school
students. These teachers had a vision for a big, end-of-year showcase where
the students could show off what they had learned to their parents, much like
a back-to-school night. This was not only a new idea, but also something
Stacey and Jim wanted the students to lead themselves, especially the older
students who would be graduating soon. So, they gathered the seniors
together one evening at Stacey’s house for dessert. Stacey and Jim shared
their vision, gave the students some parameters and then told them they were
in charge and could plan any type of event that met the criteria. The students
began discussing ideas but kept deferring to the teachers. Stacey made it
clear that the students were the ones who were actually in charge, and told
them they had the deciding vote. To make it clear, Jim and Stacey got up and
left the room. Stacey made herself busy in the kitchen and Jim sat down at
the piano and played. When they returned to the room ten or fifteen minutes
later, they discovered that the students had come up with a fun idea, made
assignments, and had a list of things they needed from the teachers. The
students continued to lead the planning and pulled off an absolutely
spectacular event that was above anything Stacey and Jim could have
imagined (or organized themselves).

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.

Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

GIVE IT BACK
Give ownership back
to the person it belongs to.
When someone brings you a problem that you think they are capable of solving,
give it back to them and ask for the “F-I-X.” (See page 186.) Play the role of
coach rather than problem solver.
If someone legitimately needs help, jump in (take “the pen”) and contribute, but
then clearly give ownership back.

MULTIPLIER DISCIPLINE
The Investor
Remedy for Idea Guy and Rescuer Accidental Diminisher

MULTIPLIER MINDSET
People are smart and will figure it out.

MULTIPLIER PRACTICES
1. Ask for the F-I-X: When someone brings you a problem, ask them to
complete the thought process and provide a solution (an F-I-X). Use
coaching questions like these to offer help, but maintain their ownership
for the work: • What solution(s) do you see to this problem?
• How would you propose we solve this?
• What would you like to do to fix this?
2. Give the “pen” back: When your team members are struggling, offer

help, but have an exit plan. Here are some statements and questions that
will help you clarify that you are giving back ownership.
• I’m happy to help you think this through, but you are still the lead on
this.
• Those are thoughts to consider. You can take it from here.
• I’m here to back you up. What do you need from me as you lead this?
Lab Results
Dave Havlek is a capable executive who describes himself as "super-stressed
and super-opinionated.” He is the head of Investor Relations for
Salesforce.com, a high growth cloud computing business known for its fast
innovation and perpetual change. Despite working frequently till 12:30 a.m.
and beyond, Dave still was a bottleneck to his group. People were left
wondering what they should be doing while he figured things out and gave
directions. When faced with a pressing need to determine a staffing plan to
get his resource-strapped team through an eight-week crunch, but out of time
to come up with the solution himself, Dave (who had spent the day in a
Multipliers leadership training program) broke from his usual management
modus operandi. Instead of figuring out the answer himself, he decided to
give the task back to his team in the form of a question. The team was
instantly energized, thrilled to accept responsibility for this task themselves.
They then worked together to build a cogent plan faster than Dave could
have done on his own.

Your Turn: Prepare for success with Multiplier practices. Use this grid
to plan and reflect on your experiments.
Look for Opportunity

Increase Your Impact

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Where and how might you use this
experiment?

Maximize Your Learning

Develop Your Skill

What happened and what is your
evidence?

Where can you use this again?

SHOPPING FOR
A NEW BOSS

If you want a job that will bring out your best, don’t just look for the right
company or job/role; shop for your boss. Here’s a shopping guide that will help
you find a Multiplier.
1. Look for signs of Multiplier and Diminisher behavior. The three traits
most correlated with Multiplier leaders are: intellectual curiosity, asking
great questions, and customer focus. Similarly, the traits most negatively
correlated with Diminisher leaders are: entertains debate and contrary
views, empowers others, seeks to understand, and has a sense of humor, so
be on the lookout for those, too. Here are a few telltale signs and questions
to help spot the Multipliers and Diminishers.
Multiplier Signs:
Has a low talk/listen ratio
Asks follow-on questions out of curiosity Asks “why” to better
understand Shares multiple perspectives on issues Shows sincere self
deprecation & laughs Diminisher Signs:
Has a high talk/listen ratio Accepts surface-level answers Asks about
“what” and “how”
Is emphatic with ideas
Takes themselves very seriously 2. Ask revealing questions. Ask
questions that expose mindset and core assumption.
Do they have a grown or fixed Mindset?
Ask: How have you become better as a leader? Listen for: Do they
demonstrate an awareness of their vulnerabilities and do they actively

demonstrate an awareness of their vulnerabilities and do they actively
seek out information about their blind spots? Has feedback from
colleagues fueled self-improvement? Do they see the downsides of
their good intentions?
Are they self or team focused?
Ask: Tell me about your team? Listen for: Not what they say, but how
long they can talk. If they are self-focused, the conversation will come
back to them quickly.
How do they view their role?
Ask: What is the fundamental role that leaders play here? How would
others describe your role on the team? Listen for: Do they see
themselves as a thought leader or a catalyst?
How do they view intelligence?
Ask: What type of people are seen as highly intelligent here? Listen
for: Is there a singular view of intelligence or do they think people
bring unique types of capabilities.
How much responsibility and ownership do they give others?
Ask: What is an example a project that is currently owned by
someone at my level? Listen for: Do they describe a set of tasks or a
large project or initiative?
3. Check the reviews. Sleuth around to find out what it's like to work for this
boss. Talk to the people who are currently working for him or her or use
tools like Glassdoor.com.
4. Try before you buy. If you have any doubts, ask to work initially as a
contractor or consultant. If this isn’t feasible, ask to sit in a team meeting
or participate on a conference call to better understand how the team
works.
Note: If the prospective manager is uncomfortable with you asking or doing any
of the above, you’ve just received all the information you need.

MULTIPLIER EXPERIMENTS

MULTIPLIER EXPERIMENTS
STEP 1: Once you’ve identified your Accidental Diminisher tendencies, select an

experiment that will remedy that vulnerability and help you be more of a
Multiplier. Need to revisit your Accidental Diminisher tendencies? Take the quiz
at www.multipliersbook.com.

STEP 2: If you want to accelerate your development as a Multiplier leader, pick a

colleague—an employee, peer, or boss—to choose your experiment for you.
STEP 3: Ask your colleague:

Which of the Accidental Diminisher tendencies is my vulnerability? (In
other words, in which way do you see me shutting down good ideas and
action in others, despite having the best of intentions as a leader?)
Which experiment would help me get the most out of other people?

Why?
What insights can you offer that would help me be a better leader to you
and the team?

The Multipliers Assessment
Are You an Accidental Diminisher?
In our research, we were surprised to discover how few Diminishers understood
the limiting effect they were having on others. Most had moved into
management having been praised for their personal—and often intellectual—
merit and assumed that their role as boss was to have the best ideas. Others had
once had the mind of a Multiplier but had been working among Diminishers for
so long, they had gone native.
Accidental or not, the impact on your team is the same—you might be getting
only half of the true brainpower of your team.
The Accidental Diminisher Quiz is a quick assessment that will allow you to:
• Reflect on ten common management scenarios and how closely they
describe your own approach to management.
• See to what extent you may be inadvertently diminishing your people.
You’ll get an instant AD score—the smaller, the better!
• Get an immediate report analyzing your responses with suggestions for how
you can adjust your leadership practices to lead more like a Multiplier and
get more from your team.
To access the Accidental Diminisher Quiz, go to

www.multipliersbooks.com.
Click on the Accidental Diminisher Quiz link to complete the
online assessment.
To conduct a complete 360-degree assessment or to measure
how much intelligence you or your team is accessing from the
people around you, contact: The Wiseman Group at

people around you, contact: The Wiseman Group at
www.TheWisemanGroup.com or send an email to
info@TheWisemanGroup.com.

Notes

Foreword
1. Peter F. Drucker, Management Challenges of the 21st Century (New York: Harper Business, 1999),
135.

Preface
1. David R. Schilling, “Knowledge Doubling Every 12 Months, Soon to Be Every 12 Hours,” Industry
Tap, April 19, 2013; “Quick Facts and Figures about Biological Data,” ELIXIR, 2011; Brian Goldman,
“Doctors Make Mistakes. Can We Talk About That?,” TED Talks, November 2011; Brett King, “Too
Much Content: A World of Exponential Information Growth,” Huffington Post, January 18, 2011.
2. The name has been changed.
3. http://www.gallup.com/poll/165269/worldwide-employees-engaged-work.aspx.
4. https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/hr-topics/employee-relations/Pages/SHRM-Job-Security-IsNo-Longer-Top-Driver-of-Satisfaction.aspx#sthash.x5fhRn2v.dpuf.
5. This data comes from the Multipliers 360 assessment and utilization index that was conducted for 1,626
managers between 2010 and November 2016. In this assessment, a manager’s colleagues, employees,
and boss assess how fully the manager is utilizing their intelligence and capability.

Chapter 1: The Multiplier Effect
1. Bono, “The 2009 Time 100: The World’s Most Influential People,” Time, May 11, 2009.
2. The name has been changed.
3. The name has been changed.
4. Research method and data available in appendix A.
5. Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (New York: Random House, 2006).
6. Nicholas D. Kristof, “How to Raise Our I.Q.,” New York Times, April 16, 2009.
7. Ibid.; Richard E. Nisbett, Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count (New York:
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2009).
8. Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad, Competing for the Future (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
1994), 159.
9. The name has been changed.
10. Dweck, Mindset, 6.
11. Ibid., 7.
12. Adrian Gostick and Scott Christopher, The Levity Effect: Why It Pays to Lighten Up (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2008), 12. Pat Riley, speech to SAP (Miami, July 12, 2011).
13. Joel Stein, “George Clooney: The Last Movie Star,” Time, February 20, 2008.

Chapter 2: The Talent Magnet
1. The name has been changed.
2. Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (New York: Random House, 2006).
3. Jack and Suzy Welch, “How to Be a Talent Magnet,” BusinessWeek, September 11, 2006.

Chapter 3: The Liberator
1. The name has been changed.
2. Students scoring either “proficient” or “advanced” levels have increased from 82 to 98 percent.
Students scoring “below basic” or “far below basic” levels have decreased from 9 to 2 percent.
3. The Multiplier of the Year award is an annual contest sponsored by The Wiseman Group and given to
leaders who exemplify the ideals and impact of Multipliers based on nominations from their
employees. Information can be found here: http://multipliersbook.com/nominate-leader-2016multiplier-year-award/.
4. Peter B. Stark and Jane S. Flaherty, The Only Negotiating Guide You’ll Ever Need (New York:
Random House, 2003).

Chapter 4: The Challenger
1. Larry Huston and Nabil Sakkab, “Connect and Develop: Inside Procter & Gamble’s New Model for
Innovation,” Harvard Business Review, March 2006.
2. Interview with Riz Khan, One on One, Al Jazeera broadcast January 19, 2008.
3. Noel Tichy, The Leadership Engine (New York: Harper Business, 1997), 244.

Chapter 5: The Debate Maker
1. Standing in the Rose Garden on Tuesday, April 18, 2006, amid pressure to remove Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld from his cabinet position, Mr. Bush described his approach to making decisions. He
explained, “Don Rumsfeld is doing a fine job . . . I hear the voices, and I read the front page, and I
know the speculation. But I’m the decider, and I decide what is best. And what’s best is for Don
Rumsfeld to remain as the secretary of defense.”
2. Joe Klein, “The Blink Presidency,” Time, February 20, 2005.
3. Michael R. Gordon, “Troop ‘Surge’ Took Place Amid Doubt and Debate,” New York Times, August 30,
2008.
4. Quoted in Adam Bryant, “He Prizes Questions More Than Answers,” New York Times, October 24,
2009.
5. Ibid.
6. Shared inquiry is a method of learning developed and taught by the Junior Great Books Foundation.

Chapter 6: The Investor
1. Nic Paget-Clarke, interview in Ahmedabad, August 31, 2003, In Motion magazine.
2. “The Big Picture” was developed by Catalyst Consulting.
3. The Economist ranking for Murthy/Infosys: http://www.marketwired.com/press-release/worlds-mostadmired-ceos-2005-microsofts-bill-gates-named-most-admired-global-leader-nasdaq-wppgy571937.htm.
4. Based on our research survey on the leadership practices of Multipliers and Diminishers. See appendix
B.

Chapter 7: The Accidental Diminisher
1. Carol Dweck, Mindset: The New Psychology of Success (New York: Random House, 2006).

Chapter 8: Dealing with Diminishers
1. For a detailed description of the research conducted for “Dealing with Diminishers,” see the latter half
of appendix A.
2. Freedman, Joshua. “Hijacking of the Amygdala”
https://web.archive.org/web/20091122194535/http://www.inspirations-unlimited.net/images/Hijack.pdf
(PDF). Archived from the original on November 22, 2009. Retrieved 2010-04-06.
3. Elinor Ostrom and James Walker, Trust & Reciprocity: Interdisciplinary Lessons from Experimental
Research (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2003), 3–7.
4. The name has been changed.
5. www.speedoftrust.com/How-The-Speedof-Trust-works/book.
6. For example, glassdoor.com, greatplacetowork.com, and vault.com.
7. This data comes from the Multipliers 360 assessment that was conducted for 1,626 managers between
2010 and November 2016. In this assessment, a manager’s colleagues, employees, and boss assess how
fully the manager is utilizing their intelligence and capability.

Chapter 9: Becoming a Multiplier
1. John H. Zenger and Joseph Folkman, The Extraordinary Leader (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002),
143–47.
2. Phillippa Lally, Cornelia H. M. van Jaarsveld, Henry W. W. Potts, and Jane Wardle, “How Are Habits
Formed: Modelling Habit Formation in the Real World,”
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ejsp.674/abstract (July 16, 2009).
3. The name has been changed.
4. David D. Burns, Feeling Good: The New Mood Therapy (New York: William Morrow and Company,
1980).
5. “culture,” Merriam-Webster.com, 2016, https://www.merriam-webster.com (October 24, 2016).
6. Saritha Pujari, “Culture: The Meaning, Characteristics, And Functions.” Yourarticlelibrary.com: The
Next Generation Library. http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/culture/culture-the-meaningcharacteristics-and-functions/9577/.
7. Ibid.
8. Kim Ann Zimmermann, “What Is Culture? | Definition of Culture,”
http://www.livescience.com/21478-what-is-culture-definition-of-culture.html (February 19, 2015).
9. Ifte Choudhury, “culture; some definitions,” https://www.tamu.edu/faculty/choudhury/culture.html,
Texas A&M.
10. “culture,” BusinessDictionary.com, 2016, http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/culture.html.
11. “Elements of Organizational Culture,”
http://www.kautilyasociety.com/tvph/communication_skill/organizational_culture.htm.
12. Daniel Pekarsky, PhD, “The Role of Culture in Moral Development,” Parenthood in America.
Published by the University of Wisconsin-Madison General Library System.
http://parenthood.library.wisc.edu/Pekarsky/Pekarsky.html, 1998.
13. The Multiplier of the Year award is an annual contest sponsored by The Wiseman Group and given to
leaders who exemplify the ideals and impact of Multipliers based on nominations from their
employees. Information can be found here: http://multipliersbooks.com/nominate-leader-2016multiplier-year-award/.
14. ROI of 163 percent was measured by the ROI Institute Europe and approved by Jack & Patti Phillips.
15. This failure-to-launch cycle is from the Multipliers workshop and is a derivative of the Gartner Hype
Cycle, which begins with a technology trigger, has a peak of inflated expectations, then proceeds with
a trough of disillusionment and then continues in a steady upward climb (enlightenment and
productivity). Unlike this broad market cycle, personal and organizational change cycles often get
killed rather than progress up this slope of enlightenment.

Appendix A: The Research Process
1. James C. Collins, Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap—and Others Don’t (New
York: Harper Business, 2001), 7.
2. Shane Legg and Marcus Hutter, Technical Report: A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence (Lugano,
Switzerland: IDSIA, June 15, 2007).
3. Linda S. Gottfredson, “Mainstream Science on Intelligence: An Editorial with 52 Signatories, History,
and Bibliography,” Intelligence 24, no. 1, (1997): 13–23.

Index

The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which
it was created. To locate a specific entry, please use your e-book readerʼs search
tools.
ABN AMRO, 277
accelerators
assumptions and, 248–50
for becoming a Multiplier, 248–59
colleagues as, 258–59
experiments as, 253–56
setbacks and, 256–58
working the extremes, 250–53
Accidental Diminishers, 191–210
as Always On, 194
becoming a Multiplier and, 260
best intentions and, xx–xxi, 67
characteristics of, 26–27, 32
data analysis example, 191–93
discussing, 268, 269–70
experiments by, 318–43
Felix as, 260, 262, 263
as Idea Guys, 193–94
minimizing tendencies toward, 208–9
Multipliers as, 303–4
name the genius and, 318–19
as Optimists, 198–200
as Pacesetters, 195–97
as Perfectionists, 201–2
as Protectors, 200–201
quiz, 261, 340, 343
as Rapid Responders, 197–98
realization of, 247

as Rescuers, 195
self-awareness of traits, 202–4
sharing this book, 307–8
as Strategists, 201
summary, 210
vulnerability, 193
accomplishments, difficult
Liberators and, 73
accountability. See also ownership Investors on, 165–66, 173–78, 189
Multipliers and, 22
addition, logic of, 13–15
Advent International, 73–74, 296, 312
Affymetrix, 143–44, 151, 293, 296, 313
“Akers, Jonathan,” 129–32, 149–50
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 265–66
Allen, David, xii
Allred, Doug, 166
Always On
Accidental Diminishers as, 194
extreme questions and, 328–29, 341
giving 51% of the vote and, 334–35, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 208
Multiplier culture and, 261
name the genius and, 318–19, 340
playing Fewer Chips and, 322–23, 340
Amazon, 245, 293, 296
ameba model, 42–43
anxiety. See also tense leaders creating, 88, 89
A players, 40, 53, 63
Apple Inc., 13, 16, 45, 79, 224–25, 231, 243, 293, 296, 311, 312
assumptions
challenging, 108–9
of Diminishers, 18, 23, 249, 250, 283
of Multipliers, 23, 248–50
positive intent, 237–38
AT&T, 259–64, 271, 314
Circle of Safety coat, 263
AT&T Partner Solutions, 272
AT&T University, 271
Atlanta Kitchen and Bath Show, 125
AWK (A-W-K), 176, 187. See also F-I-X, asking for the baby steps, challenges and, 125–26
Bachrach, Ernest, 73–74, 312
backup, in investments, 172
Bain & Company, 34, 37, 296, 311
Bamboo HR, 269–70
Banana Republic, 327
“Beckham, Brian,” 38–39

beliefs, generating, 116–18, 127
Bennion Center at University of Utah, 107–8, 125, 296, 312
best work
demanding, 83–85, 95
distinguishing outcomes from, 83–84, 95
Better Place, 296
Bhatt, Ela (Elaben), 163–65, 313
Big Picture exercise, 168
Binet, Alfred, 44
blind spots, Accidental Diminishers and, 206
Blink (Gladwell), 132
Block, Peter, 109
blockers, removing, 52–56, 62
Bloom Energy, 52–54, 84–85, 116–17, 171, 296, 312
Bono, 1, 284
book talks, 268, 269
Booz Allen Hamilton, 169
Bossidy, Jack, 253–54
bottom performers, Multiplier culture and, 302–3
boundaries, ignoring, 45–46, 62
Boys and Girls Clubs of the Peninsula, 111–13, 296, 313
Brandon, John, 79, 312
British Telecom, 101
Brown, Tim, 139, 313
BTS, 273, 321
Bush, George W., 133–34, 346n1
business metrics, integrating Multiplier practices with, 277
bus trips, as challenges, 125
Cadwell, Courtney, 49–50
California Youth Soccer Association, 314
Campbell, Bill, 44–45, 85, 243–46, 314
capability
Diminishers and, 29
logic of multiplication leaders and, 16
mindsets and, 44
Carter, Jimmy, 126
Center for the New Generation, 313
Challengers
asking hard questions, 114
assumptions and, 108–9, 250
becoming, 121–26, 127–28
as belief generator, 116–18
clearing the bar, 98–99
creating a starting point, 110–11
discussion guide, 316
Gymboree example, 97–99

Know-It-Alls vs., 102–4, 127–28
laying down a challenge, 111–15
leveraging resources, 128
Multipliers as, 21–22, 23, 32
Oracle example, 104–7
others filling in blanks for, 114–15
practices of, 106–18, 127
raising the bar, 97–98
reframing problems, 109–10, 127
seeding opportunities, 107–11
showing the need, 107–8
challenges. See also stretch challenges bus trips as, 125
concrete, 112–14
Extreme Question, 122–24
laying down, 111–15, 127
Chambers, John, 166, 313
“Chang, Michael,” 65–66, 91–92
children
on parent information night, 75
research on, 12
speaking in questions to, 122–23, 124
talking up mistakes with, 92
Choi, Jae, 157, 171, 313
Cisco Systems, 166, 293, 296, 313
Claris, 244
Clarke, Michael, 175, 314
classrooms. See teachers
Clinton, Hillary, 164
Clooney, George, 26, 311
coaches
as Investors, 160–61, 171
as Micromanagers, 161–62
co-creating the plan, 116
Cole, Mark, 205, 206
collaboration, learning and success cycle and, 73–74
Collins, Jim, 292
Commander “Abbot,” 3–4
Commander “Fredricks,” 2–3
common language
culture and, 264, 267–68
Multiplier practice, 268, 269
community service, showing the need for, 107–8
company founders, as Diminishers, 304
complete work, expectations for, 175–77, 189
confidence, reduced, Diminishers and, 220
“Connect and Develop” (Huston and Sakkab), 109, 110
consequences, natural, respecting, 177–78

Cook, Scott, 246
Cook, Tim, 13, 311
Covey, Stephen R., xi, 225
creating space. See space cultures. See also Multiplier culture layers of, 266–68
traits of, 264–66
Cunningham, Dawn, 275
cycle breaking
addressing one issue at a time, 238
admit mistakes, 234–35
asking for performance intel, 227–28
asserting capability, 226–27
assuming positive intent, 237–38
caveats on, 229–30
celebrating progress, 238–39
exploiting boss’s strengths, 231
giving user’s guide, 231–32
inspiring Multiplier leadership in others, 237–39
inviting to party, 236–37
listen to learn, 232–34
multiplying up, 230–37
overview, 219–21
retreating and regrouping, 224–25
sending right signals, 225–26
shopping for new boss, 228–29
signing up for a stretch, 235–36
strengthening other connections, 223–24
summary, 240–41
turning down volume, 221–23
cycle of attraction, Talent Magnets and, 36–38, 41–43
cycle of decline, Empire Builders and, 38–41
cycles. See idle cycles; learning cycles Dana, Jubin, 314
Dankberg, Mark, 81–82, 312
death spiral
breaking cycle of, 217–18
diminishing, 215–16
Debate Makers
assumptions of, 250
becoming, 151–53, 155–56
characteristics of, 135–38
Decision Makers vs., 132–35, 155
discussion guide, 316
framing issues, 138–41
Mengerink as, 134–35
Multipliers as, 22, 23, 32
practices of, 138–48, 155
sound decisions and, 146–48, 154, 155
sparking debate, 142–46, 155

debates
client deal and, 255–56
Diminisher’s approach to, 148–51
discussion, dissent, and, 154
elements of, 142–46
on Multiplier model, 297
process for, 152–53, 155
sparking, 142–46, 155, 332–33, 341
switching sides in, 137, 145–46, 153, 155
team strength and, 156
yin and yang of, 142–46
Decision Makers
“Akers” example, 129–32
Bush (George W.) as, 133–34
Debate Makers vs., 132–35, 155–56
Diminishers as, 22, 23
decisions
clarifying process for, 146–47
communicating rationale for, 148
forcing, 150–51
making, 147
sound, 146–48, 155
Delange, Rob, 300
depression, working with Diminishers and, 220
de Rijk, Rick, 277
The Devil Wears Prada, 68, 89
Dewey, John, 65
Diminishers. See also Accidental Diminishers; Diminishers, dealing with; Empire Builders; Know-It-Alls;
Micromanagers; Multipliers, becoming; Tyrants assumptions of, 18, 23, 249, 250, 283
blockers as, 53
breaking death spiral cycle, 217–18
characteristics of, 6, 32
confessions of, 243–44
confronting others as, 213–15
confronting self as, 211–13
context, culture and, xxi
continuum between Multipliers and, 30–31, 151, 299
costliness of, 14–15
crisis leadership by, 300–302
death spiral and, 215–16
debates and, 148–51
as Decision Makers, 22, 23
definition of, 292
direction setting by, 118–21
as Empire Builders, 21, 23
environment approach of, 87–89
execution approach, 179–85

five disciplines of, 20–23
idea of, xvii–xviii
Intel case study, 9–10
as Know-It-Alls, 22, 23
leadership roles and, 306–7
as Micromanagers, 22, 23
mind of, 17–19, 20
on mistakes, 87
resonance of Multipliers vs., 247
selective people as targets of, 299–300
success of Multipliers vs., 306
talent management, 56–58
as Tyrants, 21, 23
unaware, shifting to Multiplier from, 270–71
Diminishers, dealing with, 211–41
address one issue at a time with, 238
admitting mistakes to, 234–35
asking for performance intel from, 227–28
asserting capability against, 226–27
assuming positive intent with, 237–38
caveats on warding off, 229–30
celebrating progress with, 238–39
choices with, 219
cycle breaking strategies, 219–39
defenses against, 221–30
exploiting strengths of, 231
inspiring Multiplier leadership in, 237–39
inviting to the party, 236–37
leading, 219–20
listen to learn from, 232–34
Multiplying up and, 230–37
Myers-Briggs Type Indicators and, 225–26
reactions to, 219
retreating and regrouping and, 224–25
shopping for new boss and, 229
signing up for a stretch under, 235–36
strengthening other connections, 223–24
summary, 240–41
testing coping strategies, 298
turning down volume of, 221–23
user’s manual of you for, 231–32
direction setting
asking for target and reason for, 227–28
by Diminishers, 118–21
discovery, creating space for, 80–81, 95
discussions
dissent and debate and, 154

dominating, 149–50
as shared inquiries, 151–52
for sharing this book, 308
Disraeli, Benjamin, 1, 31, 284
dissent, discussion and debate and, 154
“Dolan, Marcus,” 161–62
doubt, working with Diminishers and, 220
DreamWorks Studios, 296
Drucker, Peter, xiii, 97
Dweck, Carol, 12, 18, 19, 44, 199
early win, orchestrating, 117
Eastman Chemical, 273
East Palo Alto, California. See Boys and Girls Clubs of the Peninsula Einstein, Albert, 281–82
The Elders, 165
Ellison, Larry, 104–5, 106, 170, 232–33
emotional intelligence, 44
Empire Builders
cycle of decline and, 38–41
Diminishers as, 21, 23
letting talent languish, 57–58
putting people in boxes, 57
resource acquisition, 56–57
Talent Magnets vs., 36–41, 62–63
Enslin, Robert, 312
environment
creating space in, 78–82, 95
Diminisher’s approach to, 87–89
for framing issues, 140
learning cycles, 85–87
of Liberators, 73–74, 76–77
of Multipliers vs. Diminishers, 21
US middle-school history class, 75–76
European Journal of Social Psychology, 253
everyone, asking to debate, 155
evidence, for debates, 152, 153, 155
experiments
choosing, 342
create stretch challenges, 330–31
extreme questions, 328–29
give 51% of the vote, 334–35
give it back, 336–37
make a debate, 332–33
making space for mistakes, 326–27
name the genius, 318–19
poker chip example, 322–23
selecting, by Accidental Diminisher tendency, 340–41

shopping for new boss, 338–39
supersize it, 320–21
talk up your mistakes, 324–25
thirty-day, 253–56
experts. See also Know-It-Alls chess master as, 99–102
exploiting boss’s strengths, 231
The Extraordinary Leader (Zenger and Folkman), 250–51
Extreme Question challenges, 122–24, 208, 328–29
to learn from Diminisher, 234
failure to launch success cycle, 278–79, 348n16
families
Multiplier culture and, 283–84
Pacesetter in, 196–97
feedback
asking for, 228
eliciting, 203–4
Felix, Mike, 259–64, 271, 314
51 percent of the vote, 166–67, 185, 189, 208, 334–35, 341
Fisher, Irene, 107–8, 125, 312
F-I-X, asking for the, 176–77, 186–87, 189, 336–37
fixed mindset, 18
Flextronics, 175, 296, 314
Folkman, Joe, 250–51, 252
framing issues, 138–41, 155
frequently asked questions
bottom performers and, 302–3
crisis Diminisher leadership, 300–302
cultural differences and, 303
Diminisher–Multiplier continuum, 299
Diminishers in leadership roles, 306–7
Multiplier and Diminisher tendencies, 300
Multiplier strengths, 308
Multiplier that also diminish, 303–4
one thing on path to Multiplier, 309
potential for becoming a Multiplier, 306
research question, 305
selective Diminisher and Multiplier behavior, 299–300
sharing this book, 307–8
success of Multipliers vs. Diminishers, 306
2× Multiplier effect, 304–5
visionary leaders, 304
Fry, Chris, 276–77
Galahad, Sir, 283
Gallagher, Alyssa, 27, 49–50, 312
Gallup’s State of the Global Workplace study, xix Gandhi, Mohandas K., 163

Gap, 296
Gardner, Howard, 44
Gartner Hype Cycle, 348n16
GE, 125
Gelwix, Larry, 28, 48, 83–84, 160–61, 312
gene pool engineering, 53
genius
appreciating all types of, 44–45, 62
labeling and, 48, 51–52, 59, 253–54
makers of, 10
naming, 318–19, 340
native, 46–48
problem with, 5
questioning, 4–8
Gilbert, Clay, 333
giving it back, 174, 187–88, 189, 259
Gladstone, William Ewart, 1, 284
Gladwell, Malcolm, xiv, 132
Glassdoor.com, 339
GM Daewoo, 296
Goldman Sachs, 144
Goleman, Daniel, 44
Google, 45, 245, 293
Gotcha question, 101, 119
governments, Multiplier culture and, 283–84
Green Belt Movement, 117, 296, 313
Grigsby, Kevin, 228
Grodman, Jason, 331
Groundhog Day, 7
growth
headcount, 13, 281
leadership in times of, 6
growth mindset, 19, 199
Gujarat Mahila Housing SEWA Trust, 165
Gujarat State Mahila SEWA Cooperative Federation, 165
Gymboree, 97–99, 104, 114, 296, 312
Haas, Matthew, xviii
habits. See new habits “Hall of Fame” Multipliers, 311–14
Hamel, Gary, 14
Hancock, Marguerite Gong, 51–52, 312
hard opinions
labeling, 91–92
soft opinions vs., 66–67
hard questions, asking, 114, 153, 155
Harvard Business Review, 109
Havlek, Dave, 259, 337

headcount growth, 13, 281
“Healy, Jenna,” 68–69, 89
Hecht, Mark, 273
helicoptering down to reality, 116
Henley, Jeff, 104–5
Heritage, Sean, 211–13, 314
heroes & legends
culture and, 265, 267–68
in Multiplier culture, 274–75
Multiplier practice, 268
Hewlett-Packard, 296
Hexal AG, 41–43, 296, 311
hierarchical cultures, Multipliers in, 303
Highland High School Rugby, 28, 83, 160–61, 296, 312
Hoke, John, 80
holding tank for ideas, 208
Homenet South Asia, 165
home routines, Extreme Question Challenge with children and, 122–23
how, in issue framing, 139
HP Enterprise Services, 255–56, 323
Hugo, Victor, xv
humor, 25–26, 227
Humphrey, Hubert H., 154
Huston, Larry, 109–10
idea generation, 73, 74, 87–88
Idea Guys
as Accidental Diminishers, 193–94
extreme questions and, 328–29, 341
giving it back and, 336–37, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 208
name the genius and, 318–19, 340
IDEO, 139, 313
idle cycles, 120–21
If-Then statements, Diminishers and, 227
Infosys Technologies, 183–84, 296, 314
Intel, 8–10, 293, 296, 311
intellectual capital, engagement at work and, xix Intellectual Curiosity, 122
intellectual supremacist, 17–19
intelligence
contextual and cultural barriers to using, xxi definition of, 292–93
extending, 11–13
extracting, 11
leadership leveraging, xii–xiv
logic of multiplication leaders and, 16
Multipliers and, 29
one way, 5

organizational capacity, sharing this book and, 308
of others, Diminishers and, 119–20
test and types of, 44
intense leaders, 21, 70–72, 95
intentions. See also leadership best, Accidental Diminishers and, xx–xxi, 67
positive, assuming, 237–38
Interact Performance Systems, 314
interviews
on dealing with Diminishers, 297
on Multipliers, 295–96
structured, 295
Intuit, 44, 85, 245, 246, 296, 314
Investors
accountability and, 173–78
asking for the F-I-X, 186–87
assumptions of, 250
becoming, 185–88
complete work expectations, 175–77
defining ownership, 167–71
discipline of, 163–65
discussion guide, 316
example, 157–59
giving it back, 174, 187–88
investing resources, 171–72
Micromanagers vs., 159–63, 189–90
Multipliers as, 22, 23, 32
on natural consequences, 177–78
practices of, 165–78
renewable energy, 256
serial, 183–85
slanted desk and, 173
IQ, 44. See also intelligence Israeli Army, 296
issues
addressing, with Diminishers, 238
framing, 138–41, 155
raising, 149
Jackson, Glen, 205
Jackson, Hazel, 204
Jackson-Spaulding, 205
JD Power Award for Customer Satisfaction, 264
Jobs, Steve, 224–25, 231
Johnson, Earvin, Jr. “Magic,” 25
Jones, Derek, 1–4
Joubert, Joseph, 129
judging others, 88, 89–90
Judging styles, Perceiving styles vs., 225–26

Junior Great Books, 151
Kelly, Patrick, 75–76, 312
Khan Academy, 49–50
Kimball, John, 161–62
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 239
Kissinger, Henry, 83
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, 53, 54, 296
Know-It-Alls
Challengers vs., 102–4, 127–28
Diminishers as, 22, 23
direction setting by, 118–21
as experts, 99–100
Kodak, 243
labeling
native genius, 48, 51–52, 59, 62, 253–54, 318–19
opinions, 91–92
La Entrada Middle School, 75–76
Lafley, Alan G., 87, 109–10, 313
Lambert, Megan, 226
Lands End, 296
Lane, Ray, 78–79, 104–7, 110–11, 116, 312
Lange, Deborah, 24, 311
Lao Tzu, 243
leaders, logic of multiplication and, 16–17
leadership. See also intense leaders; Multipliers; tense leaders celebrating progress, 238–39
civic, Multiplier culture and, 283
Covey on, xii
crisis, 300–302
Drucker on, xiii
ethos, codifying, 268, 274
intelligence leveraged by, xii–xiv with intention, 204–6
Multiplier, inspiring in others, 237–39
Multiplier, need for, xx
restraint in, 78–79, 90–91
shining spotlight on, 262
Leadership Natives, 277
learned behaviors
culture and, 265, 267–68
fusing Multipliers with daily decisions, 273
introducing Multiplier mindset, 271–72
Multiplier practice, 268
teaching Multiplier skills, 273
learning cycles
mistakes and, 92–93, 95
rapid, 85–87, 95, 121

legends. See heroes & legends Lehner, Casey, 80–81, 275, 312
leveling the playing field, 81–82, 95
LG Electronics, 329
Liberators
assumptions of, 250
Bachrach example, 73–74
becoming, 90–93
creating space, 78–82, 95
demanding best work, 83–85, 95
discussion guide, 315
environment of, 72–73
example, 65–66
hybrid climate of, 76–77
as intense leaders, 70–72
on mistakes, 87
Multipliers as, 21, 23, 32
people’s best thinking and, 90
practices of, 76–87
rapid learning cycles and,w 85–87
restraint by, 78–79, 90–91
shifting ratio of listening to talking, 79–80
smart but timid colleague and, 254–55
Spielberg example, 74
teacher example, 75–76, 346n2
Tyrants vs., 68–72, 95–96
Lincoln, Abraham, xxi
listening
becoming a Multiplier and, 244, 250, 260, 272
death spiral and, 215–16
to Diminishers, 233, 234
Diminishers on, 132–33
Pacesetters on, 196
shifting ratio of talking to, 79–80
logic of addition, 13–15
logic of multiplication, 16–17
Lokesh, liberating, 254–55
Los Altos School District, 312
Lovell, Gary, 255–56
low performers, Multiplier culture and, 302–3
Maathai, Wangari, 117, 313
Macwan, Jyoti, 164
Mandela, Nelson, 165
Man on Wire (documentary), 117–18
Mansoura, Mahmoud, 323
“Maxwell, Chip,” 119
Maxwell, John C., 204–6

McCauley, Matt, 97–99, 103–4, 114, 312
McCorcle, Brooks, 271–72
McKeown, Greg, 7, 291
McKinsey & Company, 157–58, 296, 313
Mead, Margaret, 154
Mendy, Sean, 111–13, 313
Mengerink, Arjan, 133, 313
mentoring, under Felix, 263
Micromanagers
Campbell example, 243–44
Diminishers as, 22, 23
execution approach, 179–85
Investors vs., 159–63, 189–90
jumping in and out, 181–82
taking it back, 182–83
Microsoft Learning, 27–28, 85, 86, 135–38, 293, 296, 313
middle managers, Multiplier culture and, 278–80
Millennials, Multiplier leadership and, xx mindset
of Diminishers, 17–19, 20
fixed, 18
growth, 19
of Multipliers, 19–20, 271–72
Mission Impossible, 98–99, 114, 124. See also stretch challenges mistakes
admitting, to Diminisher boss, 234–35
admitting and sharing, 85–86
learning from, 86–87, 95
making space for, 93, 326–27
product recall and, 144–45
talking up, 92–93, 234, 324–25
Tyrants vs. Liberators on, 87
Moore, Dennis, 6
Mottlau, Tom, 329
multiple intelligences, 44
multiplication, logic of, 16–17
Multiplier culture. See also Multiplier effect; Multipliers; Multipliers, becoming building deep, 268
building momentum for, 277–80
cultivating growth, 264
Felix on common culture and, 263–64
Felix’s call to action, 261–63
Felix’s realization about, 259–61
layers of culture and, 266–68
practices to build, 268–77
understanding culture and, 264–66
Multiplier effect. See also Multiplier culture; Multipliers; Multipliers, becoming 2× difference of, xx, 10–
13, 32, 188, 280, 304–5
discussion guide, 315
significance of, 280–82

U.S. Navy example, 1–4
Multiplier Moments, at Eastman Chemical, 273
Multiplier of Multipliers, 245–47
Multiplier of the Year award, 275, 346n3, 348n13
Multipliers. See also Accidental Diminishers; Challengers; Debate Makers; Investors; Liberators;
Multipliers, becoming; Talent Magnets assessing leadership practices, 250–51
assumptions of, 23, 248–50
automatic, shifting from Diminisher to, 270–71
characteristics of, 6, 32
contextual and cultural barriers for, xxi continuum between Diminishers and, 30–31, 151, 299
crisis leadership and, 301–2
debating the deal, 255–56
definition of, 292
as Diminishers, 303–4
disciplines of, 20–23, 32
discussion guide, 315–16
down, out, or up, 230–37
experiments by, 253–56, 318–43
Facilitator Guide, 316
as genius makers, 10
“Hall of Fame,” 311–14
as hard-edged managers, 24
humor of, 25–26
idea of, xvii–xviii
Intel case study, 8–9
as Investors, 22, 23
as Liberators, 21, 23
mind of, 19–20, 103–4
most-of-the-time, 300
multiplier of, 245–47
neutralizing weakness, 251–52
playing big, 25
rapid learning cycles and, 121
researcher-administered survey, 294
research foundation, 291–93
research nominators, 293–94
research process, 294
resolve to become, 247–48
resonance of Diminishers vs., 247
selective people as targets of, 299–300
serial, 188
strengths in five disciplines of, 308
success of Diminishers vs., 306
surprising findings about, 24–27
teaching skills of, 273
Multipliers, becoming, 243–86
asking a colleague, 258–59

assumptions and, 248–50
bracing for setbacks, 257–58
building culture for, 259–80
Campbell example, 244–45
Campbell’s coaching, 245–46
discussion guide, 316
experimenting and, 253–57
genius or genius maker and, 282–84
one thing on path to, 309
summary, 285–86
three-step reaction to, 247–48
working with extremes, 250–53
Multipliers 360 assessment and utilization index, 347n7
Murray, Bill, 7
Murthy, Narayana, 183–85, 314
Myers-Briggs Type Indicators, 225–26
name the lead, 167, 189
native genius, 46–48, 62. See also genius nature, as powerful teacher, 177–78, 186, 189
Navy, U.S., 1–4
NBN (Australian broadband provider), 276
need, showing people the, 107–8
Netscape, 143, 245
new habits
experiments and, 253–57
setbacks in forming, 258
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 207
Nike Inc., 80–81, 274, 275, 276, 312
Nilekani, Nandan, 184
Nisbett, Richard, 12
norms. See rituals & norms
North Carolina State University women’s basketball program, 296
Novartis, 43
Olympics, 292
opinions
Debate Makers and, 156
hard vs. soft, 66–67
labeling, 91–92
opportunities, seeding, 107–11, 127
Optimists
Accidental Diminishers as, 198–200
debates and, 332–33, 341
making space for mistakes and, 326–27, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 209
talking up mistakes and, 324–25, 340
Oracle Corporation, 4–6, 78–79, 104–7, 110–11, 116, 182, 199, 232–33, 311, 312, 313

orchestrating an early win, 117
org (organization) charts, 45–46
organizational demands, insufficient resources for, xii outcomes, distinguishing best work from, 83–84, 95
overwork, 13–14. See also logic of addition ownership
backup for, 172
Diminishers and, 161–62
Empire Builders and, 56
as end goal, 167–68
as 51 percent of the vote, 166–67, 185, 208, 334–35
giving it back, 336–37, 341
Investors on, 159, 160, 165–66, 166–71, 189
Micromanagers and, 180–81
Multipliers and, 22, 115
stretching the role, 169–71
switching debate positions and, 153
Pacesetters
as Accidental Diminishers, 195–97
minimizing tendencies toward, 208
Multiplier culture and, 261
stretch challenges and, 330–31, 341
supersizing jobs and, 320–21, 340
talking up mistakes and, 324–25, 340
Pal, Gregory, 256
“Palmer, Richard,” 99–102, 103, 119
Parisi, Jessica, 321
Parker, Mark, 274
Patterson, Kerry, 175, 187, 314
PayPal, 245
Perceiving styles, Judging styles vs., 225–26
Perfectionists
Accidental Diminishers as, 201–2
extreme questions and, 328–29, 341
giving 51% of the vote and, 334–35, 341
making space for mistakes and, 326–27, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 209
talking up mistakes and, 324–25, 340
performance indicators, Multiplier, integrating business metrics with, 277
Personal Board of Directors (PBOD), 212
Pethel, Glenn, 222, 233
Petit, Philippe, 117–18, 282
Philips Corporation, 109
piloting a Multiplier practice, 276–77. See also experiments middle managers and, 278
Pima County Regional Wastewater Reclamation Department, 331
Pirie, Chris, 86
plan, co-creating, 116
Plato, 266

Plattner, Hasso, 170
poker chip example, 90–91, 95, 208, 322–23, 340
police, Eastern Netherlands, 133, 134–35, 313
Post, Stephanie, 319
Prahalad, C. K., 14, 55, 79, 108–9, 291, 312
pressure, Diminishers on performance and, 89–90
prima donnas, 53, 62
Pringles potato chips, 110
problems, reframing, 109–10, 127
problem solving, 73
Procter & Gamble, 87, 109–10, 313
productivity, Multiplier effect and, 281
product recall, rigor in debate over, 144–45
Protectors
Accidental Diminishers as, 200–201
making space for mistakes and, 326–27, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 209
stretch challenges and, 330–31, 341
supersizing jobs and, 320–21, 340
Putterman, Ben, 47, 227
questions
Extreme, 122–24, 328–29
framing the issue and, 139–40, 155
frequently asked, 299–309
the Gotcha, 101, 119
hard, 114, 153, 155
to learn from Diminisher, 233–34
quit and stay, cycle of decline and, 39
quiz, Accidental Diminisher, 261, 269–70
rapid cycles, 121, 128
rapid learning cycles, 85–87, 95
Rapid Responders
as Accidental Diminishers, 197–98
assuming positive intent with, 238
debates and, 332–33, 341
extreme questions and, 328–29
minimizing tendencies toward, 208
reality, helicoptering down to, 116
recruiting, 43–46. See also Empire Builders; Sridhar, K. R.; Talent Magnets reframing problems, 109–10,
127
renewable energy investment, 256
Rescuers
Accidental Diminishers as, 195
extreme questions and, 328–29, 341
giving 51% of the vote and, 334–35, 341

giving it back and, 336–37, 341
making space for mistakes and, 326–27, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 208
Multiplier culture and, 261
research process
dealing with Diminishers, 297–98
definitions, 292–93
in-depth interviews, 295–96, 297
foundation, 291–93
industry expansion, 296
industry selection, 293
literature review, 298
model, 294, 297
nominators, 293–94
strategy testing, 298
structured interviews, 295
study, 7–8
survey, 294, 298
resource leverage, 13–17
Challengers and, 128
high-cost Diminsher and, 14–15
Investors and, 165–66, 189, 190
logic of addition, 13–15
logic of multiplication, 16–17
Multipliers and, 29
restraint
leadership and, 78–79
learning, 90–91
retreating and regrouping, Diminshers and, 224–25
return on investment (ROI), 15, 277, 348n15
rigor, demand for, 143–46
“risk and iterate” goals, 80–81
rituals & norms
culture and, 265–66, 267–68
in Multiplier culture, 276–77
Multiplier practice, 268
Robinson, Tajianna (Taji), 112–13
ROI (return on investment), 15, 277, 348n15
Romney, Mitt, 33–34, 37, 311
Rumsfeld, Donald, 346n1
Russell 2000 index, 97
safety, for best thinking, 142, 146
Saint-Exupéry, Antoine de, 157
Sakkab, Nabil, 109–10
Salesforce, 16–17, 174–75, 276–77, 296, 337
Salt March, 163

Sanders, Ryan, 269
Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, California, 165
SAP AG, 70–72, 293, 296, 312, 313
scarcity, 17, 281
Schneer, George, 8–10, 311
schools. See also Boys and Girls Clubs of the Peninsula; Highland High School Rugby; teachers Accidental
Diminisher in, 191–93
Diminisher as coach in, 161–62
Junior Great Books program, 151–52
Multiplier culture and, xv, 283–84
naming the genius in, 59
screwup of the week, 93, 235. See also mistakes Scully, John, 243
self-awareness, 202–4, 270–71
Self-Employed Women’s Association (SEWA), 164–65, 296
Serial Investors, 183–85
Serial Multipliers, 188
setbacks, bracing for, 257–58
SEWA Academy, 165
SEWA Insurance, 165, 313
Shackleton, Ernest, 36–37
shared beliefs
culture and, 265, 267–68
Multiplier practice, 268
in strong cultures, 273–74
shared inquiries, 151–52, 346n6
sharing
mistakes, 85–86
Multiplier strategies with colleagues, 258
space with Diminishers, 236–37
shopping for new boss, 229, 338–39
Siegel, Sue, 28, 60–61, 143–44, 151, 313
slanted desk metaphor, 173
SMT Systems, 99–102
soft opinions, 66–67, 91–92
space. See also environment; restraint creating, Multiplier culture building and, 269–70
Diminishers dominating, 88
Liberators creating, 78–82, 95, 254–55
for mistakes, 93
sharing, with Diminishers, 236–37
Spielberg, Steven, 74, 312
spinning, decisions and, 150
Sports Illustrated, 162
spotlights, shining, 51–52, 62, 262, 275, 278
Sridhar, K. R., 27, 52–54, 55, 84–85, 87, 116–17, 171–72, 312
staff meetings, as debate incubators, 245–46
Stanford University, 296
starting point, creating, 110–11

Strategists
Accidental Diminishers as, 201
extreme questions and, 328–29, 341
minimizing tendencies toward, 209
name the genius and, 318–19, 340
playing Fewer Chips, 322–23, 340
stretch challenges and, 330–31, 341
strengths
boss’s, exploiting, 231
team, debates and, 156
topping off, 252–53
stress
operating under, 93–94
working with Diminishers and, 220
stretch challenges, 124, 126. See also Mission Impossible creating, 330–31, 341
signing up for, 235–36
Strüengmann, Thomas and Andreas, 41–43, 311
supersizing jobs, 59–60, 62, 320–21, 340
superstars, letting go of, 60–61, 62
support bases, broadening, 223–24
surgery, framing the issue in, 140–41
surveys
on dealing with Diminishers, 298
researcher-administered, 294
Sysmex America, 319
talent
disengaged, cycle of decline and, 39–40
ignoring boundaries for, 45–46, 62
languishing, Empire Builders and, 57–58
looking everywhere for, 43–46
Talent Magnets
assumptions of, 250
becoming, 58–60
boundaries ignored by, 45–46
cycle of attraction and, 36–38, 41–43
discussion guide, 315
Empire Builders vs., 36–41, 62–63
looking for talent, 43–46
Multipliers as, 21, 23, 32
naming the genius, 59
native genius finding, 46–48
piloting the practice of, 276–77
practices of, 43–56
removing blockers, 52–56
Romney example, 34–36
shining spotlights, 51–52

supersizing jobs, 59–60
utilizing people to their fullest, 49–52
talking. See also debates by Accidental Diminishers, 192, 207
by Diminishers, 119
by The Genius, 9
playing Fewer Chips and, 90–91
shifting ratio of listening to, 79–80
up mistakes, 92–93, 234, 324–25
teachers
as Investors, 171
as Liberators, 75–76, 312, 346n2
Multiplier culture and, 283
Tell, William, 84–85
tense leaders
environment and, 88
intense leaders vs., 72, 95
Tyrants as, 68–69
Theater (conference room), 148, 149

30-Day Multiplier Challenge
debating the deal, 255–56
labeling talent, 253–54
liberating a colleague, 254–55
remote alternative energy worker, 256
Thornton Brothers, Inc., 333
3M, 275

360-degree assessment, 203, 230
The Extraordinary Leader on, 250–51
identifying strengths using, 252–53
management Multiplier practices, 275–76
teaching Multiplier skills and, 273

360-degrees, multiplying up and, 237
Tichy, Noel, 125
Tiller, Tom, 125
trust, preaching message of, 263
Turkheimer, Eric, 12
2 times effect, xx, 10–13, 32, 188, 280, 304–5
Tyrants

creating anxiety, 89
Diminishers as, 21, 23
dominating the space, 88
judging others, 89, 90
Liberators vs., 68–72, 95–96
temptations to become, 66–67
as tense leaders, 68–69
underutilization
by Diminishers, 23, 29
insufficient resources and, xii
latent talent and, 27
logic of addition and, 14
logic of multiplication leaders and, 16
Unitus, 296
University of Michigan, 312
University of Utah, Bennion Center at, 107–8, 125
US Air Force, 211–13, 314
user’s manual of you, 231–32
US Navy Postgraduate School, 301
U-verse TV service, 264
venture capital firms, 165–66
ViaSat Inc., 81–82, 312
visionary leaders, 304
VitalSmarts, 296
volume, turning down Diminisher’s, 221–23
Vu, Quynh, 325
“Wallis, Jasper,” 14–15, 56–57
waterline, for mistakes, 93
weakness, neutralizing, 251–52
Welch, Jack and Suzy, 61
White House, 296
Whitman, Meg, 33–35, 36, 37
who, in issue framing, 139
why, in issue framing, 139
“Wiesel, Eva,” 180–81
Wigglesworth, Edward, 191
Williams, Derek, 24
“Wilson, Timothy,” 87–88
Wilson, Woodrow, 33
Woodward, Bob, 132
Wookey, John, 174–75, 313
working the extremes development strategy, 250–53
Yale Medical School, 300–301
“Yamamoto, Garth,” 88, 181–82

yin and yang, of debates, 142–46
Yunus, Muhammad, 188
Zenger, Jack, 250–51, 252
Ziob, Lutz, 27–28, 85–86, 135–38, 140, 145, 148, 151, 313

About the Author

Liz Wiseman is a researcher and executive advisor who teaches leaders around
the world. She is a former executive at Oracle Corporation and the author of
three bestselling books: Multipliers, The Multiplier Effect, and Rookie Smarts.
Liz has been listed on the Thinkers50 ranking and named one of the top ten
leadership thinkers in the world. She holds a bachelor’s degree in business
management and a master’s degree in organizational behavior, each from
Brigham Young University.
Discover Great Authors, Exclusive Offers, and more at hc.com.

Praise for

multip liers
“Multipliers is a great manifesto for today’s leaders. The author provides a
hands-on guide showing leaders how to make their total organization smarter by
tapping the brainpower of everyone at all levels. A very timely and insightful
book.”
—Noel Tichy, coauthor of Judgment with Warren Bennis, and Professor
of Management and Organizations at the University of Michigan
“We’ve all known Multipliers—people who bring the best, not the worst, out
of everyone around them. They’re a company’s greatest resource. If you
want to learn how to become a Multiplier or transform others into genuine
Multipliers, read on. If you want to enhance your own career and strengthen
your company, read on.”
—Kerry Patterson, bestselling author, Crucial Conversations
“A fascinating book that shows how mindsets shape the way people lead. This
book will forever change the way we think about leadership.”
—Carol Dweck, Lewis and Virginia Eaton Professor of Psychology,
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, and author of Mindset
“Liz Wiseman’s insights are helpful, practical, and relevant. Any leader who
needs to get more done with the same (or fewer) resources will find this
book a gift and a valuable resource.”
—Dave Ulrich, professor, the Ross School of Business, the University of
Michigan
“This book will speak to every CEO and CFO. Multipliers get so much from
their people that they effectively double their workforce for free.”

—Jeff Henley, chairman of the board, Oracle Corporation
“Multipliers is a compelling read. A must-have manual for any in a leadership
position or aspiring to become a leader. It’s obvious Liz Wiseman did the
homework, and those of us who read Multipliers are all the better for it.”
—Byron Pitts, ABC Nightline
“This engaging and subversive book asks a vital question: ‘How can we grow
and harness human talent to address the great issues of our day?’ Multipliers
makes us rethink many of our old assumptions.”
—Gareth Jones, visiting professor, IE Madrid, and coauthor, Why
Should Anyone Be Led by You?
“This book touches upon such a fundamental truth about leadership—one that
has been waiting to be named, explored, and finally addressed. Liz Wiseman has
created a language that will be with us for a very long time, impacting millions.”
—Verne Harnish, founder, Entrepreneurs’ Organization (EO), and
author of Scaling Up (Rockefeller Habits 2.0) “Multipliers is brilliant and
extraordinarily timely! It belongs on the bookshelf of every leader—and
every leadership scholar.”
—Roderick M. Kramer, William R. Kimball Professor of
Organizational Behavior, Stanford University School of Business

Copyright

MULTIPLIERS, REVISED AND UPDATED. Copyright © 2017 by Elizabeth Wiseman.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written
permission of HarperCollins e-books.
ORIGINALLY

PUBLISHED

IN

2010

BY

HARPER

BUSINESS,

AN

IMPRINT

OF

HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS.

Revised and Updated Edition published 2017.
Cover Design by Christine Van Bree
Cover Art: © Getty Images (Faces); © Henk Dawson and Amy Hayes Stellhorn
(Light Bulb Illustration)
Print ISBN 978-0-06-266307-8
EPub Edition May 2017 ISBN 9780062663061

About the Publisher

Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada 2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor Toronto, ON M4W 1A8,
Canada www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com

